Grapes and Atherosclerosis. Maria Luz Fernandez and Jacqueline Barona.

Abstract. Grapes are a good source of polyphenols, compounds characterized by their antioxidant, antifibrotic and anti-inflammatory properties. Atherosclerosis, defined as the narrowing of the lumen in the main arteries and associated with decreased blood flow, thrombosis, and myocardial infarction, can also be accelerated by oxidative stress, inflammatory cascades, and fibrosis. Evidence from numerous clinical interventions has demonstrated that grape polyphenols, from whole grapes or grape products, affect several metabolic processes in humans that are linked with the amelioration of atherosclerosis, including decreases in low-density lipoprotein oxidation and platelet aggregation, decreases in dyslipidemias, increases in flow-mediated vasodilation, reduction in inflammatory cytokines, and lowering of oxidative stress. Grape polyphenols have also been shown to decrease atherosclerotic plaques in animal studies and to reduce inflammation and cholesterol in the aorta. At the cellular level, polyphenols from grape seeds and grape pomace have been shown to lower oxidative stress by the reduction of nuclear factor-kappa B production, upregulate endothelial nitric oxide synthetase, inhibit platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and decrease cyclo-oxygenase activity, among other mechanisms. Resveratrol has also been demonstrated to mediate an anti-inflammatory response through the toll-like receptor 4, nuclear factor-kappa B, and hypoxia-inducible factor pathways. Overall, there appears to be strong evidence of the protective effects of grapes and their products against atherosclerosis.

Introduction. Cardiovascular diseases, a group of disorders that include coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, stroke, and other conditions, continue to be the highest cause of death in developed and underdeveloped countries, with an estimated 17.9 million deaths each year. Remarkably, more than four per five deaths are due to heart attacks and stroke, and one-third occur in people under the age of seventy.

Atherosclerosis, a complex and multifactorial process associated with atherogenic dyslipidemia, oxidative stress, and inflammatory conditions, is the underlying cause of cardiovascular disease. The interactions of oxidized lipoproteins, monocyte-derived macrophages, T cells, and the cells of the arterial wall result in a process that leads to the formation of atherosclerotic plaques. When macrophages are activated, this leads to the release of cytokines and growth factors that induce apoptosis.

There are several risk factors contributing to atherosclerosis, which can be classified into two major categories: behavioral and metabolic. Behavioral factors refer to lifestyle, including smoking, unhealthy diets, and lack of exercise; these could be potentially modified. Metabolic factors resulting from lifestyle and genetic predisposition include high blood pressure, elevated blood cholesterol, diabetes, and obesity.

The first step in atherosclerosis is the accumulation of L D L in the intima of the vessel as a primary event, which leads to the formation of oxidized L D L. This modified lipoprotein promotes the differentiation of monocytes into macrophages, along with the concomitant expression of scavenger receptors including S R-A and cluster of differentiation 36. This leads to unregulated uptake of L D L and cell foam formation, the first step in the atherosclerosis process. The continuous accumulation of cholesterol further leads to the formation of a necrotic center containing cholesteryl esters, cell debris, and macrophages. Advanced atherosclerosis results in a progressive narrowing of the vessels, leading to ischemia. However, acute myocardial infarction largely results from plaque rupture and thrombosis. Atherosclerosis, for the most part, is an irreversible process. Thus, the prevention of this condition, especially by dietary factors that could reverse these disorders, will be the focus of this book chapter.

Vascular function in the endothelium is regulated by the release of vasoconstrictors and vasodilators, of which nitric oxide has a central role. Endothelial function and how it is affected by diet can be measured by flow-mediated vasodilation by assessing changes in brachial artery diameter after a 5-minute constriction with a blood pressure cuff. Flow-mediated vasodilation can be measured by high-frequency ultrasound, providing key information on endothelial health and atherosclerosis risk. Antioxidants have been shown to prevent reductions in flow-mediated vasodilation in diabetic individuals, hypercholesterolemic patients, and those at risk for heart disease.

Bioactive compounds found in dietary sources can be useful in preventing the atherosclerotic process. Polyphenolic compounds are phytochemically active compounds that have been classified into flavonoids and nonflavonoids. Grapes contain numerous polyphenols with great potential to positively modify the major players in the development of atherosclerosis, including pro-inflammatory cytokines, enzymes, transcription factors, lipoproteins, and reactive oxygen species. The beneficial effects of grapes on human health have been documented extensively; however, due to the irreversibility of atherosclerosis, dietary approaches that include grapes and grape products need to be identified to prevent its development.

There are several lines of evidence derived from epidemiological observations, clinical studies, and mechanistic studies using animal models and cells supporting the protective effects of grape polyphenols against atherosclerosis. This chapter will consider evidence from epidemiological and clinical studies that support the role of grapes or grape products in reducing atherosclerosis development or influencing surrogate markers of this process. Most human studies discussed in this chapter are meant to provide the most reliable evidence about grape or grape product supplementation by including randomized, placebo-controlled, and double-blind studies designed to document their specific effects in protecting against atherosclerosis. The dose, time of supplementation, and type of grape product, grape juice and products derived from grapes, will be evaluated in an effort to recognize the bioavailability of the distinctive bioactive components associated with these products. Further, information about the type of population studied, healthy versus high-risk patients or patients with cardiovascular disease, will be discussed for a better understanding of appropriate dietary recommendations for different populations. It is important to be aware that, currently, researchers are using concentrations of grape and grape products that are more suitable for human supplementation rather than pharmacological dosing.

Animal studies using several models of atherosclerosis, including ApoE knock-out mice, salt-sensitive rats, pigs, and guinea pigs, are also discussed since they help us understand the mechanisms of action of the different polyphenols present in grapes and provide an explanation regarding the beneficial effects observed in humans. Cell studies with grape extracts or phytochemicals present in grapes, including resveratrol, that provide key information regarding signaling and metabolic pathways are also reviewed.

Grape Composition. Grapes were cultivated for winemaking at least 7000 years ago and represent the world's third most valuable crop as it is consumed both fresh and in processed products, including wine, jam, juice, jelly, grape seed extract, dried grapes, vinegar, and grape-seed oil. Grapes belong to the genus Vitis, which includes about 79 accepted species; however, most cultivated grapes around the world are varieties of Vitis vinifera due to its high morphological and genetic diversity, with more than 10,000 cultivars, including seedless and nonseedless varieties in white, black, and red colors.

Vitis vinifera contains several phenolic compounds and aromatic compounds, which contribute to their characteristic color, organoleptic properties, nutritional value, and antioxidant properties and provide protection against environmental challenges. All phenolic compounds have some common features, such as an aromatic ring composed of six carbon atoms with one or more hydroxyl groups or their derivatives. Their susceptibility to oxidation due to unsaturated double bonds and hydroxyl groups make phenolic compounds valuable antioxidants. The higher the total phenolic content, the higher the antioxidant activity, and phenolic content is a genotypic character. One study showed a strong correlation between the phenolic composition of different varieties of Vitis vinifera, including Syrah, Merlot, and Cabernet Sauvignon, and antioxidant capacity, measured by ferric-reducing antioxidant power, ABTS, and D P P H assays, with quantitative differences in antioxidant capacity based on phenolic compound content. Similarly, a close relationship between high phenolic composition and high-quality wines has been reported. Therefore, the phenolic composition of grapes is associated with their nutritional and quality properties. A comparison between 30 grape varieties reported diverse antioxidant capacity, measured by ferric-reducing antioxidant power, Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity, total phenolic content, and total flavonoid content. Several antioxidants were identified and quantified, including caffeic acid, catechin gallate, epicatechin, gallic acid, protocatechuic acid, and rutin, which could contribute to the antioxidant activities of grapes and their effects on different diseases.

Phenolic compounds of grapes are divided into two groups: first, nonflavonoids, characterized by having a simple C6 backbone, including hydroxybenzoic acids, hydroxycinnamic acids, volatile phenols, and stilbenes; and second, flavonoid compounds, composed of 15 carbon atoms: flavones, flavonols, flavanones, flavan-3-ols, and anthocyanins. The generic structure of flavonoids consists of two aromatic rings, the A and B rings, linked by three carbons, which are usually in an oxygenated heterocycle ring, called the C ring; differences in the latter give rise to the flavonoid compound classification.

Among flavonoids, flavan-3-ols or flavanols are the most abundant phenolics in grapes, which are found in similar concentrations in skins and seeds. Flavan-3-ols include catechins, the monomeric units for proanthocyanidin biosynthesis. Proanthocyanidins, also known as tannins, are mainly present in the seed, skin, and stem tissues of grapes as both oligomeric and polymeric compounds. In grape seeds, proanthocyanidins represent the major fraction of the total polyphenol extract, and their composition differs between seeds and skin, with the seeds having shorter polymers comprised of similar amounts of catechin and epicatechin subunits. In the skin, proanthocyanidin polymers tend to be much longer and are composed mainly of epicatechin subunits. Anthocyanins, conjugated derivatives of anthocyanidins that are mainly bound to sugars, hydroxycinnamates, or organic acids, are water-soluble pigments responsible for the red and blue colors found in the skins of blue, red, or black grapes. Anthocyanins of Vitis are structurally based on five aglycones, anthocyanidins: malvidin, cyanidin, delphinidin, peonidin, and petunidin, which are classified depending on the number and position of their hydroxyl groups and methylation degree. Red grapes can produce anthocyanins, while white grapes cannot; therefore, the total phenolic level of red grape skins is higher than that of white grapes.

Flavonols are another class of flavonoids that differ from one another in several characteristics including the number and type of compounds in the B ring and are normally glycosylated at the C-3 position of the C ring providing glucosides, galactosides, rhamnosides, and glucuronides with their typical structures. Grapes synthesize flavonols, such as kaempferol, quercetin, and myricetin, and the methylated forms isorhamnetin from quercetin, laricitrin, and syringetin both from myricetin. Analysis of the flavonol profile conducted in 91 grape varieties presented several differences. In red grapes, the main flavonol was quercetin at 43.99 percent, followed by myricetin at 36.81 percent, kaempferol at 6.43 percent, laricitrin at 5.65 percent, isorhamnetin at 3.89 percent, and syringetin at 3.22 percent. In white grapes, the main flavonol is quercetin at 81.35 percent, followed by kaempferol at 16.91 percent and isorhamnetin at 1.74 percent. The delphinidin-like flavonols myricetin, laricitrin, and syringetin were missing in all white varieties, indicating that the enzyme flavonoid 3,5-hydroxylase is not expressed in white grape varieties. Flavones differ from flavonols in that they lack a hydroxyl group at carbon 3. Apigenin and luteolin are the main flavones in grapes.

Among nonflavonoid compounds, hydroxycinnamates or hydroxycinnamic acids are the third most abundant class of soluble phenolics in grape berries, after proanthocyanidins and anthocyanins. These compounds accumulate mainly in the flesh; however, they are also present in other grape tissues. The predominant hydroxycinnamic acids in grapes are p-coumaric, caffeic, and ferulic acids, which differ in the type and number of substituents on the aromatic ring. Hydroxybenzoic acids are present in lower quantities and include gentisic acid, salicylic acid, gallic acid, p-hydroxybenzoic acid, protocatechuic acid, tannic acid, vanillic acid, and syringic acid, mainly found in their free form. Gallic acid is the most abundant hydroxybenzoic acid derivative in grape stems, skins, and seeds, followed by syringic acid in grape stems and protocatechuic acid in grape seeds and skins.

Other nonflavonoid compounds present in grapes are stilbenes, the structure of which comprises two aromatic rings linked by an ethane bridge. The main grape stilbenes are cis- and trans-resveratrol, resveratrol-3-O-beta-D-glucopyranoside known as piceid, piceatannol, and resveratrol oligomers known as viniferins. Compounds belonging to the stilbene family possess the skeleton based on the trans-resveratrol structure. trans-Resveratrol is distributed mostly in the skin, even though the concentration of this stilbene in grape skins and seeds varies considerably within the Vitis germplasm. Although present in trace quantities, the production of these compounds can increase in response to pathogenic attacks and environmental stress, such as injury, ultraviolet irradiation, or fungal infection.

It is important to note that the most powerful antioxidants, including resveratrol, quercetin, rutin, catechin, epicatechin, and epicatechin gallate, are in the skin of grapes. The different phytochemical compounds, according to the grape product extract studied, have been described elsewhere.

In addition to phenolics, grape phytochemicals from the skin, seed, and juice also include other bioactive compounds, like carotenoids and melatonin. Soluble and insoluble dietary fiber, vitamin C, minerals including calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc, and manganese, lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates including fructose, glucose, and sucrose are also important components of grapes.

Phenolic metabolism and, thus, grape composition and development are severely affected by heat, drought, and light and ultraviolet intensity. Therefore, climatic conditions determine, to a large degree, the grape varieties that can be cultivated. It is expected that climatic extremes will have an adverse effect on grape quality traits, such as phenolic compound composition across different grape crops. Polyphenols, particularly anthocyanins, decrease at elevated temperatures. Similarly, flavanol levels increase with better exposure to solar radiation. Therefore, it has been recommended to explore the Vitis germplasm, looking for those traits capable of increasing tolerance to climate change. Differences in the chemical and nutritional composition of traditional and modern grape cultivars of Vitis vinifera and hybrids have been described.

About 50 to 75 percent of grape production is processed to make wine and juice. And approximately 20 to 30 percent of fresh grape produce is pomace, which consists of the remaining skin, seeds, and stalks. The pomace is a rich source of phenolics and antioxidants, but it is underutilized. Several studies have shown that phenolics, dietary fiber, and grape seed oil can be successfully extracted and used in animal feed and the pharmaceutical, cosmetic, and food industries to improve stability and nutritional characteristics.

Currently, there is a growing trend in the wine industry to separate and recover grape skins and seeds for the disposal of winemaking by-products. In comparison to seed pomace, skin pomace is rich in polyphenols, including anthocyanins, flavonols, phenolic acids, stilbenes, and some proanthocyanidins, as well as dietary fiber. The biological activity of grape pomace polyphenol extracts to support their development and utilization for diverse health benefits is of great interest nowadays.

Epidemiological Information. Epidemiological studies have shown that a diet rich in fruits and vegetables prevents coronary heart disease and other conditions, including type-2 diabetes, which eventually can lead to atherosclerosis and heart disease. An adequate intake of a healthy dietary pattern that includes fruit and vegetables reduces the most common noncommunicable diseases, including cardiovascular disease as well as obesity and metabolic syndrome associated with increased risk for cardiovascular disease. These healthy effects of fruits and vegetables have been attributed in part to the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of polyphenols. In a study conducted with 667 individuals, it was demonstrated that a healthy diet rich in fruits and vegetables decreased systemic inflammation, as determined by measurements of inflammatory cytokines and expression of C D 14 and C D 16, two monocyte subpopulations characterized for higher potency in antigen presentation and for being pro-inflammatory.

A recent review specifically selected grapes as one of the promising nutritional fruits that may protect against cardiovascular disease. Grapes are one of the richest sources of polyphenols, including flavonoids. The intake of flavonoids has been demonstrated to have an inverse relationship with the risk of cardiovascular disease. It has also been reported that proanthocyanidins, a class of polyphenols found in grapes, have a greater antioxidant effect compared to vitamin C or vitamin E in aqueous media, and proanthocyanidin-rich grape extract has been demonstrated to lower atherosclerosis, cataracts, and diabetes.

Resveratrol, a stilbene present in grapes, has also been shown to exert a number of protective effects against cardiovascular disease risk, including anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, although its bioavailability is low. Clinical trials focused on cardiovascular diseases have shown that resveratrol was well tolerated and was beneficial in improving cardiovascular disease biomarkers.

Grape polyphenols are one of the most studied for their documented protection against heart disease, and epidemiological studies acknowledge that the consumption of grapes is associated with decreased cardiovascular risk. A review of epidemiological studies concludes that in addition to the recognized antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of grape polyphenols, emerging data suggest protection against atherosclerosis through the modulation of cellular lipid metabolism. Grape polyphenols have been shown to have other mechanisms by which grapes protect against atherosclerosis, including decreases in platelet aggregation and L D L oxidation. Endothelial dysfunction is considered an early feature in the progression of atherosclerosis, and flow-mediated vasodilation has been used to measure this function. Studies have demonstrated that polyphenols enhance the production of nitric oxide, thus increasing vasodilation. In summary, epidemiological data support the various roles in which grapes protect against atherosclerosis development.

Clinical Studies. It has been postulated that phenolic compounds derived from fruits affect four different factors of cardiovascular disease risk: vascular dysfunction, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and inflammation and oxidative stress. Several studies have demonstrated antiatherogenic effects after consuming whole grapes, grape products, grape components, or individual bioactive components isolated from grapes, such as resveratrol. These protective effects are related to the improvement of endothelial dysfunction by increasing flow-mediated vasodilation, enhancing nitric oxide bioavailability, and lowering blood pressure. Other studies have shown a positive modulation of the atherogenic lipid profile, the prevention of L D L oxidation, and the promotion of anti-inflammatory activities. The most recent and relevant studies will be discussed in the following paragraphs.

Endothelial Dysfunction and Hypertension. In recent years, considerable attention has been given to grapes and grape compounds as a treatment to alleviate hypertension. A recent meta-analysis of 23 randomized crossover trials, including 967 participants, concluded that grape products significantly decreased systolic blood pressure compared to the control group by minus 3.17 millimeters of mercury with a 95 percent confidence interval from minus 5.36 to minus 0.99 and a p value of 0.0004. There is evidence from human studies that whole grapes or grape extract may lower blood pressure in individuals with hypertension. Grape juice or a control beverage was provided to 28 healthy adult runners, 23 males and 5 females, who were randomly allocated into two groups, one consuming grape juice and the other a control beverage, for 28 days. At the end of the study, there was a significant reduction in systolic blood pressure only in the treatment group. Individuals with prehypertension and hypertension have also been shown to have decreases in blood pressure through the consumption of grape powder for 12 weeks. Further, another study demonstrated that after 6 weeks of consuming grape seed extracts, there was a lowering in blood pressure in individuals with mild hypertension. The latter study also reported improvements in insulin and insulin sensitivity.

Endothelial dysfunction is one of the first clinically detectable alterations in atherosclerosis development. Grapes have shown beneficial effects on endothelial function, measured by flow-mediated vasodilation in both healthy individuals and those with cardiovascular risk factors. Vaisman and Niv allocated 50 subjects to a placebo or to 200 or 400 milligrams of red grape cell powder for 12 weeks. The consumption of red grape cell powder was associated with an improvement in flow-mediated vasodilation. Other studies using an amount of grapes corresponding to 1.25 to 2 cups fresh grapes with standardized grape products have found similar results, by increasing the flow-mediated vasodilation response after both acute and chronic intakes, compared to placebo. An increase in the flow-mediated vasodilation response has also been observed in men with metabolic syndrome after 4 weeks of consuming grape powder. Interestingly, a meta-analysis presenting the results of nine controlled trials on the acute effects of grape polyphenol consumption on flow-mediated vasodilation reported that flow-mediated vasodilation response significantly increased in the initial 2 hours after the intake of grape polyphenols as compared with controls, with a peak effect at 30 minutes in healthy participants compared to a more pronounced but delayed peak at 60 minutes in volunteers with cardiovascular risk factors. The authors proposed that in these subjects with high cardiovascular risk factors, endothelial cells have been impaired and might require 60 minutes after the ingestion of grape polyphenols to produce adequate nitric oxide to improve endothelial function, resulting in a delayed effect.

Studies have also demonstrated the acute and chronic effects of individual grape compounds on flow-mediated vasodilation. A significant dose-dependent increase in flow-mediated vasodilation, compared to placebo, and a linear relationship to plasma resveratrol concentration, were found in a double-blind randomized crossover study testing the acute effects of three doses, 30, 90, and 270 milligrams, of resveratrol and placebo in 19 overweight or obese individuals with body mass index 25 to 35 kilograms per square meter, men or postmenopausal women with untreated borderline hypertension with systolic blood pressure of 130 to 160 millimeters of mercury or diastolic blood pressure equal to 85 to 100 millimeters of mercury. Using the same study design, these authors also evaluated the effects of chronic consumption, for 6 weeks, of 75 milligrams of resveratrol daily in 28 obese but otherwise healthy adults with a body mass index of 33.3 plus or minus 0.6 kilograms per square meter. The authors reported a significant 23 percent increase in flow-mediated vasodilation response, compared to placebo. It has been suggested by this group and by other authors that the improvements in flow-mediated vasodilation response after the consumption of grape polyphenols and some individual components, such as resveratrol, may be related to an increase in endothelium-derived nitric oxide bioavailability.

Dyslipidemia and L D L Oxidation. Hyperlipidemia, especially elevated L D L cholesterol, can lead to atherosclerosis through lipoprotein deposition inside the vessel wall and the induction of oxidized L D L, a key player in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques. These atherogenic markers have been shown to be modulated through the consumption of grapes and grape products. A recent paper reported that grape oil has the capacity to preserve compounds that prevent oxidative stress, including ascorbic acid, tocopherols, and procyanidins. A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials utilizing grape products was conducted. Twenty-four articles, including 618 subjects assigned to grape, grape juice, and grape extract and 587 subjects assigned to placebo, were evaluated. The administration of grape products was associated mainly with reductions in plasma L D L-cholesterol and oxidized L D L. Millar and colleagues utilized grape powder in individuals with metabolic syndrome, who were allocated to consume either 60 grams per day of freeze-dried powder or a placebo for 4 weeks. After a 3-week washout period, they were allocated to the alternate treatment. Although no changes in high-density lipoprotein function were observed between groups, a significant decrease in plasma triglycerides was observed during the period of grape powder intake. This was an important finding because individuals in this study had elevated plasma triglycerides, a known biomarker that increases the risk of heart disease. Razavi and colleagues conducted a study on 52 mildly hyperlipidemic subjects who were given either red grape seed extract or a placebo for 8 weeks. Subjects consuming red grape seed extract had significant decreases in total cholesterol, L D L cholesterol, and oxidized L D L, suggesting that red grape seed extract can protect against the risk of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. In the study done by Toscano and colleagues mentioned above, the group of runners who were consuming grape juice also presented decreases in L D L cholesterol and increases in H D L cholesterol, which results in a healthier L D L to H D L ratio, a key biomarker of heart disease risk.

A randomized triple-blind and placebo-controlled study was conducted with statin-treated patients, 75 individuals, undergoing primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. The effects of consuming 350 milligrams per day in a capsule of either a resveratrol-enriched grape extract, a grape extract, or a placebo for 6 months and a double dose for the next 6 months were investigated. After a 1-year follow-up, resveratrol-enriched grape extract led to a significant decrease in L D L cholesterol, apolipoprotein-B100, and oxidized L D L, whereas the non-H D L-C to ApoB ratio increased.

Inflammation and Oxidative Stress. Inflammation has a significant role in atherosclerotic lesion development, which is driven by the release of local cytokines acting upon the endothelium and smooth muscle cells. Janiques and colleagues investigated the anti-inflammatory and antioxidative effects of grapes in hemodialysis patients. This was a double-blind placebo-controlled study in which 32 subjects undergoing hemodialysis were given either 500 milligrams of polyphenol from grape powder per day or a placebo for 5 weeks. Subjects consuming the grape powder had an increase in glutathione peroxidase activity and no increase in C-reactive protein, which was observed in the placebo group, demonstrating the antioxidant potential of grapes in these patients. Using the same study design with statin-treated patients and grape products, resveratrol-enriched grape extract and grape extract, in a high-risk population of 75 individuals with stable coronary artery disease and receiving a higher dose of statins, Tomé-Carneiro and colleagues reported an increase in the anti-inflammatory serum adiponectin and a decrease in the thrombogenic P A I-1 in the resveratrol-enriched grape extract group, in contrast to the grape extract and placebo groups, after 12 months of intervention. Additionally, resveratrol-enriched grape extract downregulated pro-inflammatory gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells extracted from the participants.

However, not all the published literature supports the anti-inflammatory effects of grapes. In contrast to these studies, a meta-analysis on the effects of grape polyphenols on selected inflammatory markers by Haghighatdoost and colleagues reported no significant changes in C-reactive protein, I L-6, or T N F-alpha between the intervention and the control groups. These results point to the need to conduct more clinical trials with a higher number of participants to increase our understanding of the effects of grape polyphenols on inflammation.

Animal Studies. Different animal models have been used to understand the pathogenesis and impact of diverse treatments from drugs to dietary interventions for atherosclerosis, including mice, rats, hamsters, rabbits, pigs, dogs, and monkeys. However, these animal models cannot completely simulate human atherosclerotic lesions in location and composition, lipoprotein composition, and structure. Among the relatively small animal models, guinea pigs have the advantage of more closely resembling the human model of atherosclerosis; however, they are less widely used due to long feeding cycles and high costs. Thus, given their ease of use and lower costs, mice are the small models of choice in many laboratories, and they require genetic modifications to develop atherosclerosis, including apolipoprotein E knock-out and L D L receptor knock-out.

Although human studies are required for the validation of pharmaceutical or dietary interventions for atherosclerosis, animal studies have been crucial to advance in this field. A meta-analysis in small animal models evaluating atherosclerosis prevention through dietary interventions showed that despite heterogeneity in 511 animals, there was a significant effect of dietary compounds on the reduction of atheroma globally.

Supplementation with polyphenol-rich foods analyzed in 73 studies with ApoE knock-out and L D L receptor knock-out mice found that a majority of the studies reported a reduction in plaque, with improvements in lipid profile, antioxidant status, inflammation, and cholesterol clearance. However, not all studies reporting positive effects on atherosclerotic plaques have shown improvements in lipid profile. Grapes are a rich source of polyphenols which are known to prevent the occurrence and development of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases through antifibrosis, anti-inflammatory, antioxidative, lipid-lowering, and hypoglycemic effects as demonstrated in animal models, including rabbits and pigs. In pigs, a resveratrol-rich grape extract had been shown to effectively prevent early aortic lesions in this animal model fed an atherogenic diet with concentrations more appropriate for supplementation, 10 milligrams equivalent for a 70 kilogram human, than pharmacological doses. Pigs were fed a control diet, grape extract without resveratrol, resveratrol-rich grape extract, or resveratrol alone. Resveratrol-rich grape extract was the most effective dietary supplement for preventing the disruption of aortic elastic fibers and reducing intima thickness and fatty cell accumulation.

Most studies over the past decade have been performed using mice as models of atherosclerosis, but spontaneous hypertensive rats have also been used to evaluate effects on hypertension, endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and dyslipidemia. Despite that, previous studies with guinea pigs, which resemble human cholesterol metabolism and atherosclerosis development, have demonstrated the beneficial effects of grape polyphenols, 10 percent, consumed along with a hypercholesterolemic diet. Guinea pigs fed grape polyphenols presented lower concentrations of cholesterol in the aortas, plus lower activity of acyl CoA acyltransferase in the liver, suggesting less incorporation of cholesteryl ester into the secreted very low-density lipoprotein, leading to lower concentrations of plasma triglycerides.

Different grape preparations have been used with diverse animal models, making it difficult to compare the results. A review of 34 animal studies on the effects of grape products on cardiovascular disease risk factors included rats, ApoE-deficient mice, rabbits including normal and Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic, hamsters, gerbils, ovariectomized guinea pigs, chickens, monkeys, and dogs. Studies included animals aged 1 week to 6 months, with an average age of 2 months, and with the number of animals varying from 20 to 180, with an average of 53 per study. The grape preparations employed were either freeze-dried grapes, grape pomace, grape peel, grape seed, polyphenols from grapes, polyphenols from grape seed, extracts from white grape seed, extracts from red grape seed, a grape product rich in both dietary fiber and polyphenols, grape juice, red and white wine, dealcoholized red wine, red wine powder, or red wine extracts. And the effects of these grape products were evaluated on the following markers: hypertension, endothelial function, vasodilatation, dyslipidemia, atherosclerotic lesions, accumulation of foam cells in the aorta, platelet aggregation, endothelial cell adhesion, L D L oxidation, and oxidative and inflammation markers.

Given the association between dyslipidemia, oxidative stress, inflammation, and endothelial dysfunction in the progress of atherosclerosis and the contribution of gut microbiota, the effects of grape supplementation on different animal models have been studied.

A number of animal models have been used to test endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress. A rat model of hypertension was used in one experiment in which rats were fed a cafeteria or standard diet for 10 weeks. The antihypertensive effect of a single oral administration of a polyphenol grape seed extract was tested at different doses of 250, 375, and 500 milligrams per kilogram. Blood pressure was recorded before and 2, 4, 6, 8, 24, and 48 hours after administration. The hypotensive effect of grape seed polyphenol extract was proven in both the cafeteria diet and the standard diet. Additionally, in another experiment, cafeteria-diet-fed hypertensive rats were orally administered 375 milligrams per kilogram grape seed polyphenol extract. In this second experiment, it was demonstrated that the mechanism of grapes in improving blood pressure was due to the formation of nitric oxide.

Spontaneously hypertensive rats were treated with 250 milligrams per kilogram per day of polyphenol grape seed extract for 22 weeks to observe the effects on arterial remodeling, endothelial function, content of nitric oxide and endothelin 1, oxidative stress as measured by malondialdehyde levels, and the activities of the antioxidant enzymes superoxide dismutase and catalase. Wistar-Kyoto rats and spontaneously hypertensive rat controls, with ten rats in each group, were used as controls and were given 1 milliliter of 0.9 percent nitric sodium orally. Grape seed polyphenol extract markedly alleviated hypertension-induced arterial remodeling, which was not associated with blood pressure control. Endothelin 1 production was reduced, while nitric oxide production increased in the grape seed polyphenol extract group, which exhibited improved endothelial function. In addition, treatment with grape seed polyphenol extract significantly ameliorated oxidative stress by improving superoxide dismutase and catalase activities and reducing malondialdehyde formation. The same model of spontaneously hypertensive rats was used in other experiments to test the effects of grape skin extract and grape-pomace-enriched chow. Normotensive male Wistar rats were used as controls in both studies. In the grape skin extract study, systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, triglyceride, and glucose levels, as well as oxidative damage and antioxidant activity in the plasma and kidney, were evaluated in four experimental groups: control Wistar rats and spontaneously hypertensive rat controls that received water, as well as Wistar rats and spontaneously hypertensive rats treated with grape skin extract at 200 milligrams per kilogram per day in drinking water for 12 weeks. Compared to control groups, grape skin extract prevented the development of hypertension, dyslipidemia, oxidative damage, and increased antioxidant activity.

In the other study, normotensive and hypertensive rats were randomly assigned to homogeneous groups, based on their blood pressure and type of diet, for 14 days: normotensive and hypertensive control with standard chow, normotensive and hypertensive grape pomace 1 with a dose of 150 milligrams per kilogram per day, and normotensive and hypertensive grape pomace 2 with a dose of 300 milligrams per kilogram per day. Indirect arterial pressure was assessed, while vascular reactivity was evaluated in mesenteric resistance arteries. The winemaking by-product, grape pomace, tested in this study demonstrated therapeutic potential with hypotensive effects in a dose-dependent manner.

Other animal models have been employed to evaluate grape effects on inflammation, atherosclerotic lesions, and gut microbiota. Wang and colleagues evaluated whether grape-seed polyphenols had antiabdominal aortic aneurysm effects and what mechanisms were involved. Healthy 8-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were injected with 1.5 units of pancreatic elastase on the abdominal aortas to induce abdominal aortic aneurysm. Mice were randomly assigned into sham, model, and two treatment groups, grape seed polyphenol high and grape seed polyphenol low. The sham and model groups received 200 microliters of 0.01 molar phosphate-buffered saline daily, while the grape seed polyphenol groups were treated with grape-seed polyphenols at doses of 800 milligrams per kilogram for high dose and 400 milligrams per kilogram for low dose. Treatments began on the same day as the induction of abdominal aortic aneurysm. After 14 days, the mice were weighed and sacrificed. Aortic measurements were taken, with abdominal aortic aneurysm defined as an aortic dilation exceeding 50 percent of the normal diameter. Grape seed polyphenols at 800 milligrams per kilogram could significantly reduce the incidence of abdominal aortic aneurysm, the dilatation of the aorta, and elastin degradation in media and dramatically decrease macrophage infiltration and activation and the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-9 in the aorta, compared to the abdominal aortic aneurysm model group. Meanwhile, 400 milligrams per kilogram grape seed polyphenols could also, but not completely, inhibit the occurrence and development of abdominal aortic aneurysm. In conclusion, grape seed polyphenols showed meaningful anti-abdominal aortic aneurysm effects, and its mechanisms were related to the inhibition of inflammation.

Liu and colleagues reported the effects of a normal diet and a high-fat diet in mice, with or without grape seed proanthocyanidin extract at 300 milligrams per kilogram body weight per day by oral gavage for 7 weeks. In this study, the anti-inflammatory effect of grape seed proanthocyanidin extract was explored in high-fat diet-induced obesity, and the contribution of the gut microbiota to grape seed proanthocyanidin extract effects on metabolism was identified. Supplementation with grape seed proanthocyanidin extract significantly decreased plasma levels of inflammatory factors, such as T N F-alpha, I L-6, and M C P-1, with ameliorated macrophage infiltration in epidydimal fat and liver tissues. Grape seed proanthocyanidin extract supplementation modulated gut microbiota composition, while depleting gut microbiota through antibiotic treatment abolished the beneficial effects of grape seed proanthocyanidin extract on inflammation and adiposity.

Rivera and colleagues used a model of lethal ischemic heart disease, apolipoprotein E-deficient mice SR-B1 K O slash ApoE R61h/h mice to evaluate the effects of a red wine grape pomace. Mice were fed with an atherogenic high-fat, cholesterol, and cholic acid diet supplemented with 20 percent chow as control, 20 percent red wine grape pomace flour, or 10 percent chow and 10 percent oat fiber as fiber control. The survival time was evaluated. In addition, SR-B1 K O slash ApoE R61h/h mice were fed for 7 or 14 days with high-fat cholesterol cholic acid control or high-fat cholesterol cholic acid red wine grape pomace diets, and then plasma lipid levels, inflammation, oxidative damage, and antioxidant activity were measured. Atherosclerosis and myocardial damage were assessed through histology and magnetic resonance imaging, respectively. In the first experiment, red wine grape pomace reduced atherosclerotic lesions, improved antioxidant activity, and increased survival in mice with heart disease. In the second experiment, red wine grape pomace reduced premature death, changed T N F-alpha and I L-10 levels, and increased plasma antioxidant activity. Moreover, decreased atheromatous aortic and brachiocephalic plaque sizes and attenuated myocardial infarction and dysfunction were also observed. The authors suggested that red wine grape pomace flour intake may be used as a nonpharmacological therapeutic approach, contributing to decreased progression of atherosclerosis, reduced coronary heart disease, and improved cardiovascular outcomes.

A study by Cheng and colleagues demonstrated the effects of Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine supplementation on a model of atherosclerosis, ApoE knock-out mice on a C57BL/6 J background. Four groups of mice were assigned: normal control, model, low-dose Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine at 3.1 milliliters per kilogram body weight, and high-dose Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine at 6.2 milliliters per kilogram body weight. Mice in the normal control group were fed a normal diet, while those in the other groups were fed a high-fat diet for 18 weeks. Mice in the low-dose and high-dose Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine groups were orally administered with Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine for 18 weeks, while those in the normal control and model groups were administered an equivalent volume of distilled water. Blood lipid level, atherosclerotic lesion area, aortic inner wall cell damage, and inflammation, among other indicators of atherosclerosis, were examined after 18 weeks of treatment with Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine. Supplementation with Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine reduced atherosclerotic lesion size, improved hyperlipidemia and hepatic lipid accumulation mediated by A M P K activation, and promoted lipid metabolism via the P P A R gamma, L X R-alpha, A B C A 1 pathway. Cabernet Sauvignon dry red wine also increased beneficial gut microbiota.

Others have examined the effects of grape products on metabolic markers of dyslipidemia, cholesterol metabolism, and diabetes, as well as antioxidant status. Diabetes and dyslipidemia were induced in adult female mice using alloxan. The mice were randomly placed into five groups of 10: Group 1, normal control mice received distilled water; Group 2, positive control diabetic untreated mice, only distilled water; Group 3, diabetic mice, 200 milligrams per kilogram body weight per day of grape seed extract in distilled water; Group 4, diabetic mice, 400 milligrams per kilogram; and Group 5, diabetic mice, 600 milligrams per kilogram. After six weeks, serum and liver tissue homogenate parameters were evaluated. Grape seed extract at the highest dose was able to improve the lipid profile to normal levels. In addition, kidney and liver functions were reestablished compared to the diabetic control group.

Recently, Wang and colleagues employed pigs to demonstrate the effects of different doses of a grape seed proanthocyanidin extract: 0 milligrams, 50 milligrams, 100 milligrams, and 200 milligrams of grape seed proanthocyanidin extract per kilogram of feed for 7 weeks. On the 49th day of the feeding trial, the pigs were sacrificed after blood collection; liver and longissimus dorsi muscle were also collected. The effects of grape seed proanthocyanidin extract on cholesterol metabolism, lipid metabolism, and antioxidant status were measured by various parameters. Grape seed proanthocyanidin extract supplementation improved cholesterol metabolism by decreasing total cholesterol and triglyceride in longissimus dorsi muscle and decreasing the expression and activities of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase and fatty acid synthase, and antioxidant status by increasing serum and liver antioxidant enzymes and reducing oxidative marker malondialdehyde.

Given that atherosclerosis is a chronic process, it is important to evaluate grape supplementation in aged animal models with known risk factors for developing atherosclerosis. Sierra Cruz and colleagues fed aged female rats, 21 months old, with a high-fat, high-sucrose diet, cafeteria diet, for 11 weeks. Grape seed proanthocyanidin extract at 500 milligrams per kilogram body weight was administered 10 days prior to the cafeteria diet as a preventive treatment for a group. The other group simultaneously received grape seed proanthocyanidin extract treatment with the cafeteria diet. Body weight, metabolic parameters, liver steatosis, and systemic inflammation were analyzed. The preventive administration of grape seed proanthocyanidin extract reduced mesenteric adiposity, while grape seed proanthocyanidin extract administered simultaneously with the cafeteria diet was effective in reducing body weight, total adiposity, and liver steatosis.

In conclusion, in spite of the heterogeneity of these studies, the reviewed results on animal studies demonstrated that grape and grape products were proven to have hypotensive, hypolipidemic, and antiatherosclerotic effects compared to control treatment.

Cell Studies. Cell studies have been used to clarify specific mechanisms by which grape polyphenols decrease atherosclerosis. With about 75 percent of grape production going into the wine industry, one reason to further grape research is the quantity of waste resulting from wine in which grape pomace is considered an important by-product. Studies in muscle and endothelial cells demonstrated that grape pomace exerted antioxidant effects by increasing glutathione S-transferase and glutathione levels in both cell lines. Other studies have shown reductions in interleukin-8 levels through the addition of red pomace or white pomace to fibroblast cells. Another study was conducted with white grape powder extract and a mixture of white and red grape powder on Caco-2 cells after treatment with I L-1 beta as an inflammation inducer. Both mixtures of grape powder decreased reactive oxygen species levels and reduced N F kappa B expression and prostaglandin E2. All these in vitro studies with grape powder further document the antioxidant capacity of phenolic compounds in grapes.

Grape seed oil is rich in linoleic acid, vitamin E, phytosterols, and phenolic compounds, including catechins, epicatechins, and gallic acid, which have been shown to be protective against inflammation and oxidative stress in in vitro studies. For example, Harbeoui and colleagues investigated the unsaponifiable fraction of three Tunisian grape seed varieties and reported that this fraction had major protection against oxidative damage by modulating nitric oxide production and decreasing oxidation. Nitric oxide acts as an antiatherosclerotic molecule in the vasculature by inducing vasodilation and inhibiting platelet aggregation, leukocyte adhesion to the endothelium, and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells in response to injury. Some studies with grape juice, resveratrol, and nonalcoholic wine extracts have demonstrated increases in nitric oxide production by human platelets and endothelial cells.

Newborn human monocytes were used to investigate the properties of an unsaponifiable fraction of Vitis vinifera oil, and decreased gene expression and secretion of inflammatory biomarkers, including toll-like receptor 4, nuclear factor kappa B, and hypoxia-inducible factor, T N F-alpha, I L-1 beta, and I L-6, was observed.

Alvarez and colleagues determined that grape procyanidins inhibited nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase, implicated in increased reactive oxygen species production, in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. The authors concluded that grape procyanidins could be used as therapeutic targets for cardiovascular diseases. Grape polyphenols have also been shown to prevent endothelial dysfunction in endothelial progenitor cells by reducing reactive oxygen species production induced by hyperglycemia, emphasizing the role of these compounds in preventing the development of atherosclerosis.

Resveratrol, from bibliometric analysis, was reported to have mechanisms of action that protect inflammatory response in cardiovascular disease associated with atherosclerosis. The authors revealed that the key anti-inflammatory pathway was closely related to the T L R 4, N F kappa B, H I F-1 alpha pathway. Other studies with resveratrol demonstrated that concentrations as low as 1 micromolar suppressed T N F-alpha-induced adhesion in endothelial cells, a key event in the development of atherosclerosis. Overall, other cell studies have demonstrated that resveratrol suppresses vascular smooth cell proliferation, promotes autophagy, and may be involved in vascular senescence.

Conclusion. There is strong and convincing evidence derived from epidemiological data, clinical interventions, and animal and cell studies documenting the protective effects of grapes, grape products, and grape components against atherosclerosis. This protection results from numerous effects of grape polyphenols or other components present in grapes on metabolic routes and signaling pathways associated with oxidative stress, inflammation, platelet activation, and dyslipidemias, all of which are associated with the pathology that leads to atherosclerosis. Further studies are still required to evaluate appropriate dietary recommendations for grapes that can lead to both the prevention and amelioration of metabolic dysregulations leading to atherosclerosis.