Grapes and Gastrointestinal Health. Qing Jiang and Qianyue Wang.

Abstract. The gastrointestinal tract functions to digest food components and absorb nutrients and water. The intestinal epithelium and mucus form an important physical barrier that prevents resident and environmental toxic components from entering the circulation and tissues, including microorganisms, toxins, and other harmful compounds. Intestinal barrier defects may result in an uncontrolled influx of antigens and microorganisms, which can consequently interrupt mucosal immune homeostasis and trigger inflammation in the mucus and intestinal tissues. Interestingly, accumulating evidence shows that grapes and grape polyphenols have profound impacts on gut barrier integrity, gut microbiota, and intestinal immune response. In this chapter, we discuss the interactions of grape polyphenols with gut microbiota, the effects of polyphenols and their metabolites on intestinal barrier functions, and intestinal inflammation. Overall, existing evidence supports the notion that grapes and grape polyphenols can protect intestinal barrier integrity, promote beneficial gut microbiome, exert antioxidant and anti-inflammatory actions, and prevent or mitigate intestinal diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, irritable bowel syndrome, and colorectal cancer.

Introduction. The gastrointestinal tract serves as a highly selective barrier that is essential for the absorption of nutrients. The intestinal epithelium and intestinal mucus form a key physical defense to prevent resident and environmental toxic compounds, microbes, and pathogens from entering host circulation and tissues. Tight junction proteins, including occludins, claudins, and zonula occludins, are crucial for the maintenance of epithelial barrier integrity. When the intestinal barrier integrity is compromised, the resultant influx of intestine lumen content, including gut bacteria, can trigger exaggerated mucosal immune responses. Compromised intestinal barrier function leads to chronic local and even systemic inflammatory conditions that contribute to the development of chronic diseases, including inflammatory bowel diseases, obesity, and metabolic disorders.

Accumulating research indicates that grapes and grape polyphenols have impacts on gut barrier integrity, gut microbiota, intestinal inflammation, and oxidative stress. This review focuses on the impact of grapes and grape polyphenols on intestinal barrier functions, their modulation of gut microbes and intestinal inflammation in cell-based studies, experimental animal models, and clinical studies in humans. We will also discuss the mechanisms underlying grape polyphenol-mediated protection of gut health and the role of these compounds in intestine-associated diseases.

Major Polyphenols in Grapes. Polyphenols in grapes consist of flavonoids, which include flavonols, anthocyanidins, and catechins, and nonflavonoids, which include phenolic acids and stilbenes. Grape flavonols contain flavan-3-ols catechin and epicatechin and conjugated flavonols, for example, quercetin glucoside, kaempferol glucoside, isorhamnetin glucoside, and myricetin glucoside. Anthocyanins contain malvidin, cyanidin, delphinidin, and petunidin, which are also present in glycoside forms. Grape seeds are also rich sources of proanthocyanidins, which are oligomeric and polymeric flavonoids. Grape phenolic acids include gallic acids, hydroxybenzoic acids, and hydroxycinnamates such as caffeic and coumaric acids. Stilbenes in grapes include trans-resveratrol, cis-resveratrol, and trans-resveratrol glucoside.

Absorption and Metabolism of Grape Polyphenols. Conjugated polyphenols, such as flavanol glycosides, need to be hydrolyzed into free polyphenols, aglycones, via beta-glucosidase in order to be effectively absorbed into enterocytes in the small intestine. After aglycones are absorbed into enterocytes, these polyphenols are metabolized through phase one modification, including oxidation and hydroxylation, and phase two conjugation, such as sulfation, methylation, and glucuronidation. Similar processes of metabolism and conjugation also take place in the liver. Consequently, sulfated and glucuronidated polyphenols are found in plasma after flavonoid ingestion. Unabsorbed polyphenols move to the colon, where they interact with microbiota extensively. Research has shown that substantial amounts of ingested flavan-3-ol monomers and proanthocyanidins remain unabsorbed in the small intestine and reach the colon. There, they are efficiently transformed by the colonic microbiota into low-molecular-weight phenolic compounds, which can be absorbed by colonocytes. Specifically, polyphenols are biotransformed by gut microbiota via catabolic reactions, including deconjugation, hydrolysis, and reduction. The resultant metabolites and aglycones are absorbed for further metabolism in colonocytes and the liver.

The absorption and metabolism of resveratrol, a key stilbene in grapes, have been extensively studied. Like flavanol glucosides, glycosylated resveratrol is hydrolyzed by beta-glucosidase, and then resveratrol absorption is believed to occur by passive diffusion or via intestinal transporters such as integrins in the small intestine. Inside intestinal epithelial cells or in the liver, free resveratrol is extensively metabolized via sulfation and glucuronidation. As a result, free resveratrol is found at very low levels in the bloodstream, and the major circulation forms of resveratrol are resveratrol-glucuronide and resveratrol-sulfate. In addition to these conjugated metabolites, other resveratrol derivatives detected in tissues include piceatannol and dihydroresveratrol.

Mutual Interactions of Polyphenols and Gut Microbiota. It is believed that only a small portion of polyphenols is absorbed in the upper gastrointestinal tract, but up to 90 to 95 percent of consumed polyphenols can reach the large intestine, where gut microbes reside. Accumulating evidence indicates that polyphenols and gut microbes can modulate each other through mutual interactions.

Polyphenols Are Extensively Metabolized by Gut Microbes, and the Produced Metabolites Have Been Shown to Have Anti-inflammatory and Anticancer Properties. Polyphenols have been shown to be metabolized by gut microbiota via various catabolic reactions, including deconjugation by microbial enzymes, such as alpha-rhamnosidase, beta-glucosidase and beta-glucuronidase, ester hydrolysis, and demethylation by microbial demethylase. Polyphenols can also be reduced or hydrogenated by microbial dehydroxylase or hydrogenase or catabolized via ring cleavage by microbial decarboxylase. For instance, quercetins, epicatechins, or anthocyanins are catabolized by gut microbes to form various hydroxyphenyl propionic acids, dihydroxyphenyl acetic acids, and dihydroxyphenyl valeric acids. Additionally, metabolomic analysis has revealed that 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid and 3-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid are gut metabolites of resveratrol as a result of gut microbiome metabolism.

Metabolites derived from polyphenols via gut microbiome metabolism have been found to display anticancer and anti-inflammatory effects. For instance, the metabolites of quercetin from seven bacteria strains showed dose-dependent antiproliferation effects on human colon cancer H C T-116 cells. 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetic acid and 3-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-propionic acid, which are microbe-produced metabolites of quercetin and chlorogenic acid, respectively, decreased cyclooxygenase-2 level and attenuated DNA damage in colon adenoma cells. Further, dihydroxyphenyl acetic acid and hydrocaffeic acid have been shown to inhibit I L-1 beta-stimulated prostaglandin E2 in C C D-18 colon fibroblasts, indicating strong anti-inflammatory effects. Consistent with cell-based studies, 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid was reported to attenuate inflammation and edema by suppressing hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha in seawater aspiration-induced lung injury in rats. Moreover, ferulaldehyde, a metabolite of polyphenols with high concentrations in human urine after red wine and chocolate consumption, has been found to improve survival and attenuate inflammation in a murine lipopolysaccharide-induced septic shock model. In a recent study, treatment with gut microbiome metabolite 3-hydroxyphenylacetic acid improved spermatogenesis in old mice by inducing glutathione peroxidase 4 and inhibiting ferroptosis. In addition, 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid and 3-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid derived from resveratrol were reported to improve lipid metabolism. Consistently, researchers observed the protective effects of hydroxyphenyl propionic acids on lipid metabolism in high-fat-diet-fed mice. Taken together, these results indicate that polyphenol metabolites derived from gut microbiota transformation can significantly contribute to the beneficial effects of parental polyphenols.

Polyphenols Can Inhibit Antibacterial or Promote the Growth of Gut Microbiota Prebiotics and Affect Gut Bacterial Metabolism and Functions. Polyphenols are considered a key part of the defense system in plants and have been recognized to have antibacterial properties, especially against some common intestinal pathogens. For instance, under anaerobic conditions, resveratrol appears to inhibit the biofilm formation of Fusobacterium nucleatum, a commensal-turned-pathogenic bacterium shown to be elevated in the colonic biopsies of inflammatory bowel disease patients and associated with colorectal carcinogenesis. Tannic acid has been found to inhibit the growth of intestinal bacteria, such as Clostridium clostridioforme, Escherichia coli, and Enterobacter cloacae, possibly through iron chelation, but it does not affect beneficial Bifidobacterium infantis and Lactobacillus acidophilus, which do not depend on iron for growth. In addition to chelating iron, other mechanisms underlying antibacterial action by polyphenols have been recognized, including the disruption of bacterial quorum sensing, inhibition of bacterial DNA and ribonucleic acid synthesis, disruption of membrane function and permeability, and interference of bacterial biofilm formation.

In contrast to antibacterial activities, polyphenols have also been shown to exhibit prebiotic activities by promoting the growth of gut bacteria by assisting extracellular electron transfer or anaerobic respiration in microbes. Specifically, polyphenols are believed to serve as electron donors or acceptors, like flavin, to promote the growth of some beneficial bacteria, including Lactococcus species and Lactobacillus species. In addition, polyphenols that contain double bonds on the side chain, such as caffeic acids, have been shown to act as terminal electron acceptors to accelerate anaerobic respiration.

In addition to their impact on bacterial growth, polyphenols have been shown to influence gut microbiome's energy metabolism, including enhancing production of short-chain fatty acids such as butyrate or their precursors. For instance, the in vitro incubation of polyphenols with fecal samples led to the formation of short-chain fatty acids and the production of polyphenol catabolites, as well as elevation of short-chain fatty acid producers, including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and cluster XIVa Clostridiales. Moreover, polyphenols can promote short-chain fatty acid-producing microbes, such as Bifidobacterium. Interestingly, the growth of Bifidobacterium appeared to be stimulated by fermented polyphenol media and some biotransformation products but not by polyphenols themselves, supporting the idea that polyphenol metabolites derived from microbiota transformation can enrich short-chain fatty acid producers. In addition, polyphenol consumption can change other functions of gut microbial communities, including increasing energy production and conversion or beta-glucosidase activity and decreasing epithelial invasion, secondary bile acid production, and toxin secretion by pathogenic bacteria.

In summary, the interaction of polyphenols and gut bacteria is important for their mutual modulatory effects. On the one hand, gut microbes can catabolize and cause the biotransformation of polyphenols. On the other hand, the biotransformation of polyphenols, in turn, changes microbial functions, including the promotion of short-chain fatty acid production, and modulates microbial community composition. The metabolites derived from polyphenols as a result of transformation by gut microbiome have also been found to show anti-inflammatory and anticancer effects, thus likely contributing to the beneficial activities of their parental compounds.

Grape Products Promote Beneficial Gut Microbiome. Accumulating research indicates that gut microbiota plays significant roles in maintaining a healthy gut and attenuating intestinal diseases, including inflammatory bowel diseases and colorectal cancer. For instance, patients with colorectal cancer and inflammatory bowel diseases have reduced the relative abundance of beneficial bacteria, including butyrate producers, and increased the abundance of opportunistic pathogen species. Importantly, the fecal microbiota transplantation of stool samples from colorectal cancer patients has been reported to promote carcinogen-induced macroscopic polyps and colonic inflammation in mice compared to those treated with stool samples from healthy volunteers. Moreover, fecal microbiota transplantation using microbial community from healthy donors has been found to mitigate colitis-associated dysbiosis and even result in colitis remission in inflammatory bowel disease patients. Therefore, it has been proposed that the modulation of gut microbiota by preventive agents may be an effective strategy for controlling colitis and inhibiting colitis-associated colon cancer. To this end, polyphenols in grapes appear to be able to cultivate a healthy microbial community that prevents or restores dysbiosis.

Modulation of Gut Microbiota by Grape Polyphenols in Healthy Humans. Many studies have documented the modulatory effects of polyphenols on gut microbiota, including promoting beneficial bacteria in humans. In particular, the supplementation of polyphenol-rich whole foods or polyphenol extracts has been reported to enhance fecal Bifidobacterium and/or Lactobacillus, which are considered beneficial and commonly used in probiotic products. For instance, in a randomized trial, researchers reported that the moderate intake of red wine polyphenols for 20 days increased Bifidobacterium but did not affect Lactobacillus. Consistently, the ex vivo cultivation of feces from healthy volunteers with polyphenol extracts from grape seeds resulted in a significant increase in the number of Bifidobacterium species and Lactobacillus-Enterococcus group and the inhibition of the growth of the Clostridium histolyticum and Bacteroides-Prevotella groups. In another study, researchers showed that compared to a low-polyphenol diet, 4-week consumption of California table grape powder significantly increased the alpha-diversity index of the gut microbiota and elevated Akkermansia, Flavonifractor, and Lachnospiraceae UCG-010 but decreased Bifidobacterium and Dialister at the genus level in healthy adults. Interestingly, grape powder treatment decreased total bile acid by 40.9 percent. Moreover, in a randomized crossover controlled trial, red wine consumption was found to significantly change gut microbial composition; enrich Parasutterella, Ruminococcaceae, and several Bacteroides species; and shift metabolomics to improve redox homeostasis. Another group reported that the 2-week consumption of grapes equivalent to three servings per day did not change the alpha- or beta-diversity of the microbial community in healthy humans but decreased Holdemania species and increased Streptococcus thermophiles. These investigators also observed that grape consumption resulted in the elevation of 2'-deoxyribonic acid, glutaconic acid, and 3-hydroxyphenylacetic acid. Additionally, in another randomized crossover controlled feeding trial, polyphenols were observed to counteract animal-based diet-induced elevation of secondary bile acids, decrease short-chain fatty acids, and change microbial composition. This observation is relevant as elevated concentrations of secondary bile acids, particularly deoxycholic acid, are believed to be strongly associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer, whereas short-chain fatty acids, especially butyrate, are recognized to play a role in colorectal cancer prevention.

Modulation of Gut Microbiota by Grape Polyphenols in Healthy Animals. In agreement with the observations in humans, polyphenols have been found to cause favorable changes in gut microbiota in animals. For instance, research in animals has revealed the elevation of cecal or fecal Lactobacillus and/or Bifidobacterium in response to the supplementation of polyphenols, including resveratrol and anthocyanin-rich extracts. Moreover, curcumin or resveratrol was found to prevent age-related reductions in gut microbial richness. The supplementation of resveratrol at 300 milligrams per kilogram body weight significantly changed microbial composition compared with control diets. Moreover, researchers reported that compared to a control diet with matched nonpolyphenol content, 10 percent but not 3 percent grape powder increased gut bacterial evenness, Lachnospiraceae, and fecal short-chain fatty acids, including butyrate, in healthy mice. In addition, researchers observed that the supplementation of grape seed procyanidins in geese increased microbial richness and diversity, enhanced the relative abundance of Firmicutes, and decreased that of Bacteroidetes in the cecum. These grape seed procyanidin-supplemented diets also enriched Eubacterium coprostanoligenes and Faecalibacterium and substantially raised concentrations of acetic, propionic, and butyric acid in the cecum.

In summary, studies in healthy animals and humans have consistently demonstrated that grape polyphenols can promote beneficial gut microbes and cause favorable changes in microbial communities and their metabolism. In the subsequent sections, we will also discuss the modulatory effects of grape polyphenols on gut microbes under pathogenic conditions and the causal role of modulating gut microbiota in polyphenols-mediated disease protection effects.

Antioxidant, Anti-inflammatory, and Anticancer Activities of Grape Polyphenols. Oxidative stress and inflammation play important roles in gut barrier dysfunction and intestinal disorders, including inflammatory bowel diseases and colorectal cancer. Numerous studies have documented the antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects of polyphenols. This section will focus on the impact of grape polyphenols on key regulatory players that control oxidative stress and inflammatory responses in the intestine, while anti-colorectal cancer effects and the mechanisms of polyphenols, including antiproliferation and proapoptosis activities, have been summarized in some recent reviews.

Polyphenols may exert antioxidant effects via various mechanisms. First, phenolic moieties in polyphenols can donate electrons and hydrogens for the scavenging of reactive oxygen species, thus counteracting oxidative stress. Second, grape polyphenols can promote antioxidant defense via the activation of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2, a master transcription factor that upregulates antioxidant and anti-inflammatory enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase and heme oxygenase 1, as well as detoxification enzymes by interacting with the antioxidant responsive element. For instance, cyanidin-3-glucoside and resveratrol have been found to increase the DNA-binding activity of Nrf2, upregulate the messenger ribonucleic acid of heme oxygenase 1, and alleviate cytokine-induced reactive oxygen species in colon epithelial HT29 cells. Resveratrol and grape seed extract attenuated lipopolysaccharide-induced decrease in transepithelial electrical resistance, antioxidant enzymes, and tight junction proteins in Caco-2 cells and mitigated colitis-associated decrease in Nrf2 and heme oxygenase 1 expression in mice. Mechanistically, procyanidin B2 was shown to activate Nrf2 by stimulating the phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases. Indeed, flavonoids are believed to modulate signaling kinases, including phosphoinositide 3 kinase, Akt and protein kinase B, MAP kinase, and protein kinase C. For instance, quercetin was found to increase mucins like MUC2 and MUC5AC, possibly by increasing extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 and protein kinase C alpha in human intestinal goblet cell-like LS174T. Consistent with these studies, resveratrol, quercetin, and grape seed proanthocyanidin extract alleviated dextran sulfate sodium-induced crypt loss, elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines, and enhanced the expression of Nrf2 and heme oxygenase 1, as well as antioxidant enzymes, in rodents.

It is well recognized that polyphenols can exert anti-inflammatory effects via the suppression of nuclear factor-kappa B activation, Toll-like receptors, and pro-inflammatory cytokines in models relevant to inflammatory bowel diseases. For instance, resveratrol and quercetin have been reported to decrease lipopolysaccharide-induced Toll-like receptor 4 expression, N F-kappa B activation, and pro-inflammatory cytokines in human colon epithelial Caco-2 and SW480 cells or rat intestinal microvascular endothelial cells. Quercetin was shown to attenuate the lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of Toll-like receptor 4 and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor 3, as well as interleukin-18, I L-1 beta, I L-6, and T N F-alpha, in mouse gut. Moreover, the supplementation of grape pomace extract blocked the lipopolysaccharide- or T N F-alpha-enhanced DNA-binding activity of N F-kappa B and inhibited the production of I L-6 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, as well as the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-9, in intestinal Caco-2 cells. In addition to intestinal epithelium cells, resveratrol was found to attenuate N F-kappa B activity in immune cells, such as myeloid cells and lymphoid cells. Quercetin and kaempferol inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced phosphorylation of inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B alpha and the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and T N F-alpha in primary bone-marrow-derived mouse macrophages. Consistent with cell-based studies, resveratrol, quercetin, kaempferol, and grape-related products have been documented to decrease Toll-like receptor 4 and attenuate N F-kappa B activation, cytokines, cyclooxygenase-2 and inducible nitric oxide synthase in colon tissue in various experimental colitis models in rodents. In agreement with these preclinical studies, in a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study, the 6-week supplementation of resveratrol significantly lowered the plasma concentrations of T N F-alpha, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, and N F-kappa B activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells among patients with ulcerative colitis compared to the placebo group.

Although extensive studies have documented antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects of polyphenols, the extent of these activities contribute to the beneficial effects in vivo is not clear as polyphenols are known to have poor bioavailability. In cell-based studies, polyphenols at 10 to 100 micromolar have been shown to exhibit antioxidant, anticancer, or anti-inflammatory effects. However, the concentrations of these compounds are often below a few micromolar in the plasma or serum of animals and humans. On the other hand, polyphenols may transiently exist at higher concentrations in the colon due to poor absorption. Indeed, emerging research shows that polyphenols appear to be bioavailable in the gut and able to modulate the gut microbiota. Therefore, it is important to consider the antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer actions and gut-microbe-modulating activities of polyphenols and their metabolites when assessing their impact on gut health.

The Impact of Polyphenols on Intestinal Permeability and Barrier Functions. Accumulating research has reported that grape polyphenols can offer protective effects on intestinal barrier functions, possibly via antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, and also promote beneficial gut microbes. For instance, researchers showed that a diet containing 1 percent grape polyphenol extracts rich in B-type proanthocyanidin compounds increased the relative abundance of fecal and cecal Akkermansia muciniphila in mice. Akkermansia muciniphila is known to stimulate intestinal mucin thickness to improve gut barrier integrity. Another group examined the effects of a diet containing 8 percent grape seed meal, which is rich in bioactive compounds, including polyphenols, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and fiber, on the markers of colonic epithelial integrity, mucosal barrier function, and inflammation in dextran sulfate sodium-treated piglets. These investigators observed that the grape seed diet restored epithelial integrity and mucosal barrier reinforcement through the modulation of tight junction genes and proteins, including claudins, occludins, and zonula-1, and tight junction regulators, such as myosin IXB and protein tyrosine phosphatase, as well as mucin-2 gene. The grape seed meal also decreased pro-inflammatory matrix metalloproteinase-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression and suppressed Toll-like receptor-2 and Toll-like receptor-4 genes. Further, the supplementation of the grape polyphenol extract decreased the ileal gene expression of the lipopolysaccharide-binding protein, an acute-phase protein that promotes pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, suggesting reduced lipopolysaccharide in the circulation and protection of gut barrier integrity. Moreover, researchers reported that the supplementation of grape seed procyanidins decreased the serum concentrations of diamine oxidase, D-lactic acid, and endotoxin in geese, indicating the protection of intestine barrier integrity, and increased the total antioxidant capacity and superoxide dismutase and catalase activity in cecal mucosa. In addition, grape seed proanthocyanidin extract markedly suppressed the dextran sulfate sodium-induced elevation of the T N F-alpha, I L-1 beta, and messenger ribonucleic acid of N L R P 3 while upregulating the messenger ribonucleic acids of tight junction proteins, including zonula occludens-1, occludins, and claudin-1, suggesting the potential improvement of mucosa integrity.

Consistent with the above-cited studies in animals, the protection of the colonic epithelial barrier by grape products has also been evaluated in relevant cellular models. For instance, a proanthocyanidin-rich grape seed extract was shown to increase the expression of tight junction proteins, elevate the expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines, and decrease pro-inflammatory cytokine gene expression in lipopolysaccharide-treated Caco-2 cells. Moreover, a grape seed extract suppressed the repeated water avoidance stress-induced increase in colonic concentrations of I L-6, Toll-like receptor 4, and claudin-2 in a rat irritable bowel syndrome model and mitigated I L-6 and I L-1 beta-caused elevation of paracellular permeability in Caco-2 cell monolayers. In addition, resveratrol has been found to counteract barrier dysfunction induced by Campylobacter jejuni, a bacterial human pathogen known to cause gastroenteritis and irritable bowel syndrome. Specifically, researchers observed that in human colonic HT-29/B6 cell monolayers, Campylobacter jejuni infection resulted in decreased transepithelial electrical resistance and increased paracellular marker flux of fluorescein. Concomitantly, Campylobacter jejuni infection also compromised the distribution of the tight junction proteins occludin and claudin-5, which was accompanied by an increased induction of epithelial apoptosis. Importantly, resveratrol restored Campylobacter jejuni-induced tight junction delocalization of occludin and claudin-5 in the paracellular domain of HT-29/B6 cells, improved the disturbed epithelial barrier, and attenuated the rate of epithelial apoptosis in Campylobacter jejuni-infected I L-10 knockout mice.

In addition to studies in cells and animal models, the potential impact of polyphenols on intestinal permeability has also been examined in humans. Specifically, in a randomized, controlled, crossover intervention trial, 66 subjects aged 60 years or older with increased intestinal permeability based on serum zonulin levels, a surrogate marker of intestinal permeability, were randomly allocated to one of the two arms of the intervention, consisting of a control diet versus a polyphenol-rich diet. After an 8-week intervention, participants with a polyphenol-rich diet had reduced serum zonulin levels and diastolic blood pressure, which were strongest in those not using antihypertensive drugs. Interestingly, the intervention led to a significant increase in fiber-fermenting and butyrate-producing bacteria, such as Ruminococcaceae and members of the genus Faecalibacterium.

In summary, studies in cells, animals, and humans have consistently shown that grape products are protective toward intestinal barrier functions and prevent leaky gut induced by pathogen infection, lipopolysaccharide, stress, and pro-inflammatory cytokines. These activities likely contribute to the disease-preventing effects of grape polyphenols, which are discussed below.

Effects of Polyphenols and Grapes on Intestinal Disorders. In addition to the observation that grape polyphenols and related products appear to protect gut barrier functions, numerous studies have revealed their impact on various intestinal disorders.

Effects of Grape Polyphenols and Whole Grapes on Colitis and Gut Microbiota in Preclinical and Clinical Studies. Inflammatory bowel diseases, which include Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, affect up to 2.4 million Americans. Inflammatory bowel disease patients are known to have an increased risk of colorectal cancer and to develop colorectal cancer at a younger age compared to the healthy population. The supplementation of grape polyphenols has been shown to mitigate experimental colitis and modulate gut microbiota in rodents. For instance, the supplementation of resveratrol at various doses attenuated dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis and inflammation. Resveratrol treatment increased the fecal counts of potentially beneficial microbes, including Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, and decreased potentially pathogenic bacteria, including Escherichia coli and Enterobacteria, compared to controls. Resveratrol, quercetin aglycones, or quercetin monoglycosides are found to attenuate colitis-induced decline in alpha-diversity. In another study where trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid was used to induce colitis, resveratrol not only attenuated colitis but also reversed colitis-associated decrease of Akkermansia muciniphila and Ruminococcus gnavus or an increase in Bacteroides acidifaciens. Interestingly, quercetin supplementation was reported to alleviate experimental colitis, reduce colitis-induced bacterial penetration into the basolateral surface of colonic epithelial cells, partly via a heme oxygenase-1-dependent mechanism, and lower the relative abundance of potentially pathogenic microbe Escherichia coli in a T cell-dependent colitis model that was induced by the adoptive transfer of naive T cells into recombinase-activating gene-1-deficient mice.

In addition to purified grape polyphenol compounds, grape seed extracts or grape powder has been demonstrated to be protective against experimental colitis. For instance, the supplementation of grape seed extract mitigated inflammatory bowel disease indices, increased colonic goblet cell numbers, and elevated the relative abundance of Bacteroides and Lactobacillus in I L-10 knockout mice. Similarly, researchers reported that grape seed proanthocyanidin extract dose-dependently attenuated dextran sulfate sodium-induced pathological damage to the colonic mucosa and suppressed the elevation of pro-inflammatory N F-kappa B and cytokines, such as I L-1 beta, I L-6, and T N F-alpha. Further, grape seed proanthocyanidin extract also increased Nrf2 while decreasing Keap-1, indicating the promotion of antioxidant defense. In addition, researchers reported that 10 percent freeze-dried grape powder in a diet attenuated dextran sulfate sodium-induced fecal bleeding and diarrhea, as well as histological colitis. Another group observed that grape seed proanthocyanidin alleviated intestinal inflammation in canines, reduced intestinal permeability, and increased the abundance of bacteria with potential anti-inflammatory properties and involvement in bile acid metabolism, including Ruminococcaceae, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus torques group, and Lachnospiraceae NK4A136.

Consistent with research in experimental colitis, clinical studies have documented the beneficial effects of resveratrol or proanthocyanidins in ulcerative colitis patients. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 50 eligible patients with active mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis were supplemented with either 500 milligrams of resveratrol or a placebo capsule for 6 weeks. Resveratrol supplementation resulted in a significant reduction in the plasma levels of T N F-alpha, C-reactive protein, and N F-kappa B activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, whereas there were no significant changes in these factors in the placebo group. Resveratrol supplementation also significantly reduced colitis activity index scores. In a similar clinical study, 500 milligrams per day of resveratrol supplementation was found to improve the quality of life of patients with ulcerative colitis, partially through a reduction in oxidative stress. In addition, in another clinical study including a group of patients with ulcerative colitis in remission, the dietary intake of proanthocyanidins was found to be associated with reduced frequencies of bowel movements and increased production of mucus, which is considered beneficial for intestinal healing.

In summary, both preclinical and clinical studies have consistently demonstrated that grape polyphenols, grape extracts, and freeze-dried grape powder as whole foods protect gut barrier functions, attenuate colitis symptoms, cause favorable changes in gut microbiota, and exert anti-inflammatory effects in conditions relevant to inflammatory bowel diseases. Therefore, grapes and relevant products may be useful for mitigating and controlling inflammatory bowel diseases.

Effects of Grape Polyphenols on Celiac Disease. Celiac disease, which affects 1 to 2 percent of the general population with increased prevalence in recent years, is an autoimmune inflammatory condition of the small intestine that is caused by the ingestion of gluten proteins in genetically susceptible individuals. Celiac disease is associated with a damaged small intestine and dysfunction in absorbing nutrients from food. Although the symptoms of celiac disease, including villous atrophy, can be alleviated by gluten-free diets, this dietary regimen can be highly restrictive and sometimes difficult to maintain. For this reason, it is important to develop new therapies capable of mitigating and controlling the disease.

In this regard, emerging research revealed promising celiac disease mitigating effects by polyphenols. Specifically, researchers reported that polyphenol-rich extracts from green tea leaves or the seeds of a common grape vine attenuated small intestinal architectural changes, such as villus flattening, crypt hyperplasia, and intraepithelial lymphocyte infiltration in a murine celiac disease model where gliadin, a protein in wheat and a key component of wheat gluten, was used to trigger celiac disease in transgenic DQ8 mice. In the same study, polyphenol extracts also increased antioxidant glutathione and mitigated the elevation of intraepithelial lymphocytes. In addition, researchers observed that resveratrol could alleviate the clinical symptoms of celiac disease and oxidative stress in mice with intestinal inflammation that was costimulated by gliadin, alpha-amylase and trypsin inhibitors, and polyinosinic plus polycytidylic acid. These emerging observations suggest that polyphenols from grapes are promising for mitigating celiac disease and are potentially useful as adjuvant therapies to manage this disease.

The Effects of Grape Polyphenols on Irritable Bowel Syndrome. The prevalence of irritable bowel syndrome in the United States is between 7 and 16 percent, with a higher prevalence among women than men. The main symptoms include diarrhea, constipation, abdominal pain, or bloating. Although the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome is not fully understood, irritable bowel syndrome is believed to have disordered communication between the gut and the brain, leading to motility disturbances, visceral hypersensitivity, and altered central nervous system processing. Common treatments include dietary changes, such as increasing the intake of soluble fiber. Interestingly, emerging research has documented the potential impact of polyphenols on irritable bowel syndrome in experimental animals. For instance, researchers showed that trans-resveratrol ameliorated chronic-acute combined stress-caused irritable bowel syndrome-like symptoms including depression, anxiety, and intestinal dysfunction in male ICR mice. In another study, quercetin treatment markedly elevated the pain threshold pressure, decreased visceral motor response, and reduced 5-hydroxytryptamine in pro-inflammatory irritable bowel syndrome animals. In addition, researchers observed that rats that received chronic-acute combined stress exhibited depression and anxiety-like behavior, visceral hypersensitivity, and altered intestinal motility, as well as reduced 5-hydroxytryptamine in the hippocampus. Importantly, resveratrol dose-dependently attenuated chronic-acute combined stress-induced above-mentioned central nervous and peripheral dysfunction.

Preventive Effects of Grape Polyphenols and Grapes Against Colon Cancer. Colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in men and women combined, accounting for 8 to 9 percent of all cancer mortality in the United States. Since there is a lack of effective treatment for advanced cancer, it is necessary to develop relatively safe and effective preventive agents that can inhibit or delay the progression of early-stage colorectal cancer. To this end, many grape polyphenols have been evaluated for their colorectal cancer-preventing potentials in preclinical cell and animal models. Many studies have documented the anticancer effects of purified bioactive polyphenols found in grapes, such as resveratrol and quercetin, against colon cancer in cell-based studies and animal models. Overall, these compounds have been shown to be able to block colon cancer cell proliferation, induce apoptosis, and suppress inflammation in colon cancer cells, as well as display chemopreventive actions in various animal models against colitis-associated colon cancer or sporadic colon cancer. In this article, we focus on the anticancer effects of grape extracts or whole grapes against colon cancer in the recent 5 years.

Anticancer Effects of Whole Grapes, Grape Seed Extracts, and Anthocyanins. In agreement with individual polyphenols, grape extracts or whole grapes have also been shown to display protective effects against colitis-associated colon cancer. Researchers demonstrated that freeze-dried grape powder, prepared from a composite of fresh red, green, and black California grapes of seeded and seedless varieties, suppressed azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium-induced tumor multiplicity and colitis in mice when included at 10 percent in the diet, but not at 3 percent. The grape powder supplement counteracted an azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium-induced decrease in bacterial evenness and dysbiosis and increased the relative abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria. Moreover, supplementation with 0.1 percent anthocyanins was found to decrease the number of colon tumors induced by azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium and to significantly reduce the relative abundance of a pro-inflammatory microbe named Bilophila wadsworthia compared with the nonanthocyanin control in rats. In another study, a grape seed extract was reported to reduce tumor burden and prevent gut barrier dysfunctions in azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis-associated colon cancer.

Grape pomace, which is a by-product of wine production and is rich in bioflavonoids and dietary fibers, has been shown to inhibit inflammation, suppress the proliferation of colon cancer cells, and block tumorigenesis in vivo. For instance, it was reported that extracts prepared from grape pomace inhibited cell proliferation, enhanced cell cycle arrest, and induced apoptosis in colon cancer cells. Furthermore, grape pomace water extract was found to decrease cell viability, lipopolysaccharide-induced pro-inflammatory genes and cytokines in colon cancer SW480 cells and isolated mouse colon. Consistent with cell-based studies, researchers reported that dietary supplementation with 5 percent grape pomace in the diet suppressed azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium-induced tumor development and attenuated colonic inflammation in mice.

Resveratrol and Grape Polyphenols in Human Intervention Studies Against Colorectal Cancer. Encouraged by promising preclinical data, clinical research has been conducted to evaluate the potential impact of resveratrol and grape powder on colon cancer. In particular, in an open-label phase one pilot study, eight colon cancer patients were enrolled to examine the effects of a 14-day intervention with a plant-derived resveratrol formulation and resveratrol-containing freeze-dried grape powder on Wnt signaling in the colon. The major findings show that resveratrol or freeze-dried grape powder significantly inhibited Wnt target gene expression in normal colonic mucosa. The greatest effect on Wnt target gene expression was observed following the daily ingestion of 80 grams of grape powder.

In summary, grape polyphenols or grape powder has been shown to mitigate many intestinal disorders; exhibit antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and gut-barrier protecting actions; and modulate gut microbiota in preclinical cellular and animal models, as well as pilot human studies.

The Role of Gut Microbiota in Polyphenol-Mediated Beneficial Effects. As discussed above, polyphenols appear to be capable of increasing probiotics such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, Akkermansia, and butyrate producers, including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Eubacterium rectale, Clostridium cluster IV and XIVa, and Butyricicoccus, under both healthy and diseased conditions. In the meantime, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium have been shown to attenuate colitis and inhibit the development of colitis-associated colon cancer. Moreover, polyphenols are found to reverse disease-associated changes in the gut microbial profile, as indicated by observations that the gut microbial composition in polyphenol-treated disease animals often resembles those in the healthy ones. These results indicate that polyphenols promote beneficial gut microbes and render resistance to disease-caused dysbiosis. Further, the polyphenol promotion of these beneficial microbes may play a role in their anticolitis and anti-colitis-associated colon cancer actions.

In addition to the observations that grape polyphenols have favorable influences on gut microbiota, the role of modulating gut microbiota in grape polyphenols-mediated beneficial effects has been investigated using fecal microbiota transplantation or depletion of gut microbiota using antibiotics. For instance, using fecal microbiota transplantation, resveratrol was shown to exert anti-obesity effects by modulating gut microbiota in high-fat-diet-fed mice. Specifically, treatment with feces from donor mice that were fed resveratrol significantly lowered leaky gut markers and increased tight junction proteins, such as Z O-1, occludin, claudin-1, and claudin-2, compared to controls, indicating the causative role of resveratrol-modulated gut microbes in the protection of gut-barrier integrity. Moreover, researchers compared the effects of a grape powder on colitis in mice in the presence and absence of antibiotics. To this end, 10 percent grape powder mitigated dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis in conventional mice but failed to show anticolitis effects in gut-microbiota-depleted mice after being treated with antibiotics, supporting the notion that modulating gut microbiota plays a causal role in the beneficial effects of the grape powder. In addition, another group used fecal microbiota transplantation to determine whether the modulation of gut microbiota is a key mechanism underlying the anti-inflammation effects of grape seed proanthocyanidin. Specifically, a rectal enema using fecal samples from donor dogs that were treated with grape seed proanthocyanidin resulted in decreased pro-inflammatory cytokines in dogs with mild inflammatory bowel diseases. These beneficial effects of fecal microbiota transplantation were similar to those from another study where dogs with mild inflammatory bowel diseases were treated with grape seed proanthocyanidin directly. Together, these studies provide evidence that the interaction of grape polyphenols and gut microbiome plays a causative role in the beneficial effects of polyphenols.

Summary and Conclusions. Accumulating evidence indicates that grapes and grape polyphenols have a profound impact on gastrointestinal health, including the promotion of intestinal barrier integrity. Specifically, studies using cells and animal models have demonstrated that grape polyphenols can protect gut barrier functions, as indicated by counteracting infection- or inflammation-induced intestinal barrier dysfunction, compromised expression of tight junction proteins, increased intestinal epithelial apoptosis and elevation of pro-inflammatory markers. Consistently, a polyphenol-rich diet has been shown to decrease a leaky gut marker among people with increased intestinal permeability. Furthermore, polyphenol-rich grape extracts and powder are shown to be capable of mitigating or preventing intestinal diseases, including inflammatory bowel diseases, celiac disease, irritable bowel syndrome, and colorectal cancer. These observations strongly suggest that consuming grapes and grape polyphenols may be useful for maintaining a healthy gut and preventing intestine-associated diseases.

Multiple factors likely contribute to the protective effects of grape polyphenols on gut health. First, excessive pro-inflammatory cytokines are known to compromise gut barrier integrity. Imbalanced immune responses result in pathological conditions, as evidenced by interleukin-10 knockout mice that developed colitis. Many polyphenols have been shown to have anti-inflammatory activities, including suppressing N F-kappa B-regulated pro-inflammatory cytokines. Second, oxidative stress is also known to cause tissue damage and disrupt tight junction barriers. It is well known that polyphenols have antioxidant effects, through electron donation to scavenge reactive oxidation species. Polyphenols can also enhance total antioxidant capacity and elevate antioxidant enzymes, such as catalase and superoxide dismutase, via the activation of Nrf-2-regulated gene expression. These anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties likely contribute to the beneficial effects of grape polyphenols on intestinal integrity by attenuating exacerbated immune responses and countering oxidative-stress-induced damage, respectively.

In addition to anti-inflammatory and antioxidant actions, it has become clear that mutual interactions between grape polyphenols and gut microbiota play an important role in polyphenol-mediated protection. Specifically, grapes and grape polyphenols have been found to promote beneficial gut microbes, enhancing gut barrier functions and counteracting excessive immune responses. Meanwhile, polyphenols can also block the growth of pathogenic bacteria. Further, gut microbes can catabolize polyphenols to generate bioactive metabolites that have anti-inflammatory and even anticancer effects.

Further, emerging evidence supports the idea that the interaction between polyphenols and gut microbiota plays a causative role in the beneficial effects of polyphenols on gut health. To this end, fecal microbiota transplantation using fecal samples from donors receiving grape polyphenols is found to display similar beneficial effects on gut health as a result of the direct supplementation of grape-related products. Further, depleting gut microbe communities with antibiotics is shown to compromise the beneficial effects of grape polyphenols. As a whole, the polyphenol-gut microbiota interaction, together with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory actions, make grape polyphenols ideal for maintaining or promoting gut health and preventing intestinal diseases.

While research has revealed the beneficial effects of grape polyphenols on gastrointestinal health, additional research is needed to potentially optimize the use of grape-related products to manage intestinal diseases. First, emerging evidence suggests that polyphenols in whole foods, such as grape powder, may be better similar for attenuating diseases compared to purified polyphenols. This is exciting as diverse bioactive components in whole foods may offer synergistic benefits compared to a single polyphenolic compound. The use of whole foods may also potentially reduce side effects in contrast to the supplementation of purified compounds at a relatively high dose. However, there is limited research in this area, and so it is necessary to compare the efficacy of single polyphenol compounds versus whole grapes regarding their impact on gut barrier functions, inflammation, oxidative stress, and gut microbiota in the future. Second, studies concerning the effect of grape polyphenols on celiac disease or irritable bowel syndrome have been relatively limited. Future research is warranted on this topic, considering the encouraging data supporting the idea that grapes and grape polyphenols may be useful for mitigating these diseases. Third, grape polyphenols should be considered in combination therapies for preventing colorectal cancer. For instance, combining aspirin with grape polyphenols may be particularly interesting, which is supported by other novel aspirin combinations.

Moreover, although extensive research has been done to delineate mutual interactions between polyphenols and gut microbiota, how such interaction may have an impact on intestinal immune responses should be further elucidated. For instance, given that the interplay between intestinal microbiota and immunity is critical to gut homeostasis, research should be conducted in the future to delineate how polyphenols-gut microbiota interactions influence intestinal immunity or how polyphenols-intestinal immunity interactions impact gut microbiota. In addition, given that grape polyphenols can promote beneficial bacteria, developing synbiotics using combinations of polyphenols and probiotics should be explored to improve gastrointestinal health, as suggested by emerging relevant research.