Grapes and Skin Health. Durdana Muntaqua, Tanya Jaiswal, Karla Anaya Aldrete, and Nihal Ahmad.

Abstract. The skin is one of the most crucial organs of the body, providing a barrier that serves as the body's first line of defense against external insults. Skin health is important for the physical and emotional well-being of a person, since skin disorders can not only compromise the integrity and function of the skin but also have a tremendous impact on overall quality of life. Skin disorders may range from common issues such as allergies and acne to more severe conditions such as psoriasis and cancer. Nutritional deficiencies and external factors can damage the skin, making it more susceptible to these diseases. Oxidative stress and inflammation are key contributors to the development of various skin disorders. There has been a constant effort to identify novel compounds that can combat oxidative stress and inflammation and maintain skin health. Phytochemicals have recently garnered the interest of the scientific community as possible alternatives for the management of skin disorders, owing to their limited side effects. Grapes, Vitis vinifera, are rich in a wide variety of phytochemicals with varied biological effects such as anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anti-pigmentation, wound healing, and antiproliferative properties, making them worthy of research for skin health. Whole grapes, grape extracts, and grape phytochemicals have been shown to decrease oxidative stress, inflammation, and skin aging. Preclinical studies have suggested that grape polyphenols may be a viable approach towards offering effective strategies for inflammatory skin disorders and skin cancer. Grape-based cosmetic products are being used for their ability to improve skin elasticity and firmness, reduce the appearance of wrinkles and fine lines, and alleviate skin pigmentation and inflammation. This chapter discusses the growing body of evidence supporting the use of grapes in managing skin disorders and their emerging role as valuable ingredients in skincare products.

Introduction. The skin, the largest organ of the human body, serves to protect the internal organs from external insults and has a substantial impact on the physical and psychological well-being of a person. Skin health is affected by multiple external and internal factors, which stimulate oxidative stress and redox-sensitive transcription and translation of inflammatory mediators. Oxidative stress and certain systemic conditions may result in a variety of skin disorders such as skin aging, atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, and skin cancer, to name a few. Diet may play a role in the regulation of inflammation and inflammation-related pathologies. In recent years, there has been increasing interest among researchers in identifying dietary phytochemicals, which can prevent or mitigate skin disorders. Over the last few decades, grape phytochemicals, such as resveratrol, piceatannol, proanthocyanidins, epicatechin 3-gallate, and other polyphenols, have been investigated for their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiaging, anti-pigmentation and anticancer activities. These have been extensively studied for their beneficial effects on the prevention and treatment of skin conditions. This chapter provides a discussion on the ways in which oxidative stress can contribute to various skin disorders and the importance of dietary phytochemicals in managing these conditions. It also describes the various active components of grapes, their biological effects, and the evidence of their protective effects against inflammatory skin diseases as well as melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers.

Importance of Skin Health. The skin is the largest organ of the body that serves as the first line of defense against environmental insults. It provides a protective physical barrier against chemical or mechanical damage, microorganisms, toxins, and fluid loss. In addition, the skin is highly adaptive and plays a role in sensory perception, regulation of body temperature, immunologic surveillance, homeostasis, and certain extremely important biochemical processes, such as the production of vitamin D. A very sophisticated structure of the skin contains specialized cells, for example, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, melanocytes, and mast cells; macromolecules, for example, collagen and elastin; and appendages, for example, sebaceous glands, sweat glands, arrector pili muscle, and hair follicles. This structure allows the skin to perform its important functions including providing protective barrier, providing pigmentation, and maintaining strength, elasticity, and flexibility. In addition, skin has mast cells, which are the key players in releasing histamine, prostanoids, proteases, leukotrienes and other cytokines and chemokines and provide host defense, innate immunity and allergic responses to surface antigens. Skin health has a substantial impact on physical and psychological well-being, influencing mood, self-respect, and social interactions. Skin health is affected by multiple endogenous and exogenous factors.

Endogenous factors include oxidative stress, the aging process, nutritional status of the body, and diseases. Exogenous factors such as ultraviolet radiation, microorganisms, toxins, environment temperature, chemicals, allergens, and air pollution can affect the overall health of the skin. These factors may affect the protective function of the skin and make it injured, irritated, less elastic, and easily damaged. Any injury to the skin due to internal or external factors can lead to infections and diseases that can range from simple allergies and acne to severe skin conditions like psoriasis and skin cancers. For example, skin color is determined by the amount and distribution of melanin pigment synthesized by melanocytes in the epidermis. The abnormal production of melanin leads to skin problems including melasma, post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, and actinic lentigo. Furthermore, exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun can cause multiple negative effects on the skin. Short-term exposure to ultraviolet radiation can cause sunburn and reduce skin elasticity, while prolonged exposure can trigger premature skin aging, hyperpigmentation, and wrinkles and weaken the immune system, making the skin less able to protect itself. Moreover, ultraviolet radiation is associated with melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers. Autoimmune disorders such as psoriasis can have debilitating effects.

Hence, maintaining the integrity and health of the skin is necessary for a better quality of life. Oxidative stress is an important mechanism by which internal and external factors can impart skin damage. The next section discusses the ways by which oxidative stress can alter skin integrity, making it prone to various skin conditions.

Role of Oxidative Stress in the Skin. Oxidative stress is one of the important triggering factors for skin aging and a multitude of other skin disorders including inflammatory skin conditions and cancer. Oxidative stress is induced by reactive oxygen species generated intrinsically during intracellular mitochondrial metabolism or extrinsically by ultraviolet radiation, pollutants, and psychological stress. These reactive oxygen species or free radicals, such as superoxide anion radical, hydroxyl radical, singlet oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, nitric oxide, and peroxynitrite, impart harmful effects in the skin.

Generally, the human body has an innate antioxidant defense system, constituting glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione, ascorbic acid, and tocopherol. These antioxidants neutralize free radicals and maintain a healthy balance of reactive oxygen species in the body and skin. Nonetheless, the innate antioxidant system can be overpowered by excessive production of reactive oxygen species, thereby leading to a state of oxidative stress. Subsequent oxidation of nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and enzymes alters the normal cellular functions.

Overall, two groups of dermatologic diseases in response to reactive oxygen species are reported. In the first group of dermatological diseases, the skin disease is initiated by reactive oxygen species as the primary trigger, whereas the second group is stimulated by inflammatory mediators, which induce reactive oxygen species production, that further aggravate the disease process. Reactive oxygen species can trigger multiple cell signaling pathways, for example, the production of nuclear transcription factors like activator protein 1 and nuclear factor-kappa B, which regulate the genes involved in cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and inflammation. Consequently, oxidative stress can result in a variety of skin conditions that alter the structure and function of the skin, some of which are discussed below.

Skin Inflammation. Environmental pollutants, ultraviolet radiation, and endogenous cellular metabolism generate a plethora of reactive oxygen species due to compromised antioxidant system of the body. Deregulated reactive oxygen species level triggers a cascade of molecular pathways such as mitogen-activated protein kinases, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, protein kinase B, Janus kinase, signal transducer and activator of transcription, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells, and cyclooxygenase 2, which can stimulate the production of inflammatory mediators, including cytokines and chemokines, resulting in skin inflammation. This in turn modulates the expression of multiple genes associated with various skin diseases like psoriasis, solar dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and non-melanoma skin cancer.

For example, oxidative stress in keratinocytes induces various inflammatory chemokines, such as C X C L 1, 2, 3, 5, and 8, which recruit neutrophils and other molecules that ultimately lead to epidermal hyperplasia and psoriasis. In addition, reactive oxygen species reacts with unsaturated fatty acids to generate lipid peroxidase. This enzyme forms hydrophilic pores in biological membranes, thereby resulting in increased cellular or mitochondrial membrane permeability, oxidative damage, and inflammatory reactions. In addition, higher levels of biomarkers of oxidative stress including nitrate, malondialdehyde, and 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine are shown to be associated with psoriasis and atopic dermatitis, suggesting that the development of inflammatory skin diseases is associated with the oxidation of nitric oxide, lipids, and DNA. Thus, oxidative stress seems to be a major factor in causing skin inflammation by triggering a multitude of significant molecular pathways.

Compromised Skin Structural Integrity. The structural integrity of the skin is maintained by its extracellular matrix, which among multiple components is made of fibrous proteins like collagen, elastin, and fibronectin. These components provide tensile strength, skin stretching, and recoil, regulate cell adhesion, and support chemotaxis and migration. Their turnover is regulated by matrix metalloproteinases, which degrade collagen, fibronectin, elastin, and proteoglycans and aid in maintaining the functional and structural characteristics of the skin. However, oxidative stress increases the levels of matrix metalloproteinases in the skin due to aging, chronic sun exposure, and inflammatory diseases, leading to excessive collagenolysis, fibrinolysis, and elastolysis. Among different mechanisms of reactive oxygen species-mediated increased activity of matrix metalloproteinases, N F-kappa B-induced formation of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor alpha is well known. Interleukin-1 and interleukin-6 are known to activate matrix metalloproteinase-1, which degrades type one collagen. This results in collagen fragmentation and disorganization of collagen fibers in the dermis, which leads to loss of skin elasticity, wrinkle formation, and premature skin aging.

Studies have demonstrated that ultraviolet-mediated reactive oxygen species has dual effect on collagen synthesis. On one hand, it attenuates the synthesis of collagen regulated by activator protein 1 and matrix metalloproteinase-1. On the other hand, it generates multiple free radicals, such as singlet oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, and nitric oxide, which increase the collagen synthesis in dermal fibroblasts by activating heat shock protein 47. The latter effect is dominant in scleroderma patients, which is characterized by excessive collagen synthesis. Additionally, interleukin-6, interleukin-12, and tumor necrosis factor alpha have also been reported to cause degradation of elastic fibers, skin wrinkle formation, and increased epidermal thickness in response to skin aging and ultraviolet radiation. In conclusion, oxidative stress compromises the structural integrity of the skin and thus needs to be controlled for better skin health.

Skin Infection. Oxidative stress increases the levels of oxidized lipids, triglycerides, and other unsaturated fatty acids in the skin which stimulate sebaceous glands and increase sebum production, leading to the formation of acne in hamsters. Additionally, the inflammatory processes related to acne formation generate reactive oxygen species that changes the composition of sebum secreted by pilosebaceous unit and clogs the pores of skin. This facilitates the growth of Cutibacterium acnes, a bacterium in the skin which plays a critical role in the development of inflammatory lesions of acne. To summarize, oxidative stress leads to skin infection that is mostly manifested as acne. Thus, compounds negating oxidative stress may be used for acne management.

Pigmentary Skin Disorders. Skin color and pigmentation are regulated by the melanin produced by melanocytes. There is evidence that oxidative stress in the skin has a paradoxical action on pigmentation: on one end, it can promote melanogenesis, while on the other, it can enhance depigmentation through melanocyte degeneration. For instance, among the multiple pathways, reactive oxygen species can accelerate ultraviolet-induced pigmentation by activating melanogenesis-related proteins, including C A M P-responsive element-binding protein, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, tyrosinase, and phenylalanine hydroxylase. Moreover, the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 signaling pathway functions to reinforce the intracellular antioxidant capacity and inhibit melanogenesis. This pathway has been found to be downregulated in patients with ultraviolet-induced skin hyperpigmentation. In addition, keratinocytes also contribute to melanogenesis, since nitric oxide derived from keratinocyte differentiation can increase the melanogenic factors such as tyrosinase and tyrosinase-related protein 1.

In contrast, melanocyte degeneration induced by oxidative stress is mainly caused by the imbalance of endogenous reactive oxygen species scavenging system. For example, the transfer of hydrogen peroxide from keratinocytes to melanocytes is thought to be one of the pathogenetic mechanisms of vitiligo. Since there are low levels of antioxidant catalase and high levels of superoxide dismutase in the skin of patients with vitiligo, this results in low activity of the reactive oxygen species scavenging system and inhibition of melanogenesis. To sum up, oxidative stress can induce skin pigmentary disorders either by increasing melanogenesis or by enhancing depigmentation.

Skin Aging. Skin aging is a complex process characterized by wrinkling, sagging, dryness, roughness, and changes in skin pigmentation. The skin gradually loses its natural functional characteristics and regenerative potential. During the aging process, oxidative stress is attributed to both augmented reactive oxygen species production and reduced levels of enzymatic and nonenzymatic protectors. Exposure to ultraviolet radiation or environmental pollutants can promote skin aging due to the underlying reactive oxygen species generation. Chronic oxidative stress manipulates M A P Ks, N F-kappa B, Nrf2, A P-1, T G F-beta, and some other signaling pathways to damage skin structures such as by increasing the production of multiple matrix metalloproteinases and collapsing dermal fibroblasts. The inhibition of T G F-beta signaling is critical in maintaining the structural and mechanical integrity of dermal connective tissue, resulting in reduced production of collagen, fibronectin, and elastin, as well as thinning of the dermis. Reactive oxygen species also creates a pro-inflammatory microenvironment by inducing multiple inflammatory mediators. One example is cellular communication network factor 1, a member of C N family of secreted proteins, which regulates cell adhesion, cell-matrix interaction, collagen homeostasis, and a pro-inflammatory genetic program in response to skin injury due to oxidative stress. These processes weaken the dermal structure and mechanical integrity and contribute to age-related skin disorders such as delayed wound healing, dry skin, wrinkles, dyspigmentation, and in severe cases skin cancer.

In short, oxidative stress can cause inflammation, alter skin function, and affect the overall health of the skin. Since oxidative stress is caused by imbalances of reactive oxygen species and antioxidants in the skin, it can be managed by antioxidants. There has been a growing interest in antioxidant-rich dietary sources, as these are considered safe to use. Multiple dietary constituents fall under this category and can benefit skin health. The importance of various dietary antioxidants is briefly discussed in the following section.

Role of Dietary Antioxidants in the Skin. Diet plays a crucial role in both skin health and overall well-being of a person. Diet contains macronutrients, such as proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, and micronutrients, which include a wide range of vitamins and minerals. While macronutrients are essential components of a healthy body, providing most of the daily caloric intake, micronutrients are needed in much smaller quantities but are indispensable for sustaining life. In the United States, the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Health and Human Services collaborate to provide nutrition guidelines for the American population. These guidelines are updated every five years in accordance with the National Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research Act of 1990, a law that ensures dietary recommendations reflect the latest scientific research. Similarly, the European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism, a leading multidisciplinary organization, holds annual meetings to swiftly disseminate the latest knowledge on clinical nutrition and metabolism worldwide.

Many micronutrients have been found to have antioxidant properties. Modern medicine has shown a special interest in studying how dietary interventions can aid in reducing oxidative stress. A healthy diet is essential to maintain the normal integrity of the skin and to protect it from reactive oxygen species-mediated damage. Evidence suggests that suboptimal nutrition can adversely affect the skin. For example, distinct types of dermatitis can result from inadequate intakes of ascorbic acid, tocopherols, riboflavin, niacin, pyridoxine, biotin, zinc, and essential fatty acids. Ascorbic acid, an antioxidant, is an essential cofactor that reduces oxidative damage in combination with other enzymatic and nonenzymatic defenses. It aids in the synthesis of collagen, decreases melanin production, and enhances immune function. Ascorbic acid can decrease melanin production due to its ability to reduce the ortho-quinones generated by tyrosinase, the rate-limiting enzyme in melanogenesis. Similarly, alpha-tocopherol has been shown to protect the epidermis from oxidative stress by reducing prostaglandins, nitric oxide, and ultraviolet B-induced lipid peroxidation, all of which cause skin inflammation and facilitate sunburn. These functions make ascorbic acid and alpha-tocopherol beneficial ingredients in various cosmetic products for skin disorders such as atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, cutaneous ulcers, melasma, photoaging, and acne.

Fruits, vegetables, and other plant-based products are useful sources of nutrients that can protect skin health when either consumed as food or used as a medicine or cosmetic. These dietary sources contain polyphenols, which play a significant role in remediating multiple types of environmental stressors. These are present in a wide spectrum of produce including grapes, berries, and vegetables. In recent years, over a thousand types of polyphenols have been identified, which include resveratrol, quercetin, curcumin, epigallocatechin gallate, catechin, cyanidin, procyanidin, caffeic acid, and genistein, among others. These polyphenols have a range of biological activities and have shown benefits in protecting the skin, maintaining their integrity, and serving as adjuvants in the treatment of various skin diseases.

Polyphenols are potent antioxidants that can reduce oxidative stress through a variety of mechanisms and support the skin's defense and regeneration processes. Many polyphenols have strong anti-inflammatory and immune-regulating qualities, for example, ferulic acid, resveratrol, caffeic acid, and chlorogenic acid, which can regulate the activation of genes that promote inflammation and cytokine production, thereby affecting the makeup of immune system. In addition to their anti-inflammatory effects, polyphenols offer photoprotective benefits. For example, apigenin, found in red wine and chamomile tea, as well as polyphenols from green tea, has demonstrated the ability to protect the skin from the harmful effects of ultraviolet radiation. Polyphenols also stimulate collagen production, which is crucial for maintaining skin elasticity and structure. For example, a study on human skin cells exposed to ultraviolet radiation found that quercetin and kaempferol may help combat skin sagging and wrinkles.

Proanthocyanidins are a type of polyphenol responsible for the red, blue, and or purple color of fruits. These are considered superior antioxidants and anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive, antiangiogenic, and antiproliferative phytochemicals. Grapes contain a plethora of biologically beneficial polyphenols and other phytochemicals. Grape seed proanthocyanidins are consumed nowadays as dietary supplement. The grape polyphenol resveratrol is a potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agent, which provides its biological effects through multiple mechanisms. Some of its mechanisms include deactivating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, reducing the activity of cyclooxygenase, and stimulating endothelial nitric oxide synthase. These actions contribute to its powerful effects in combating oxidative stress and inflammation. Resveratrol has been associated with various health benefits including antiaging, wound healing, and anticancer properties. Growing evidence supports the idea that grapes play a significant role in promoting skin health and managing skin conditions. As such, the next section focuses on the phytochemicals found in grapes and their biological activities that are beneficial for the skin.

Grapes and Grape Phytochemicals. Grapes, Vitis vinifera, are a significant source of pharmacologically active components that have a broad spectrum of bioactivities. Seeds, leaves, fruits, and other parts of grapes are used in herbal medicine and as a dietary supplement. Evidence suggests that grapes can protect the skin from ultraviolet damage, revitalize the skin, and improve skin elasticity. These effects stem from the variety of chemical constituents present in grapes. These include a wide range of vitamins, sugars, lipids, and polyphenols such as phenolic acids, flavonoids, carotenoids, anthocyanins, proanthocyanidins, hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives, and stilbenes. Phytochemicals including ascorbic acid, tocopherols, tocotrienols, flavan-3-ols, resveratrol, proanthocyanidins, fatty acids, and phytosterols are mostly present in the skin and seeds of grapes. The flesh contains only trace amounts of anthocyanins and other phenolic compounds. Important grape constituents are described below.

Phenolic Acids. Grapes contain a plethora of phenolic compounds including hydroxybenzoic or hydroxycinnamic acids either in free form or as condensed tannins or conjugated with sugars and anthocyanins. The major hydroxycinnamic acids in grapes are coumaric acid, sinapic acid, chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, and ferulic acid. Vanillic acid, syringic acid, gallic acid, gentisic acid, ellagic acid, and protocatechuic acid are the hydroxybenzoic acids present in the grapes.

Flavonoids. Flavonoids are essential components of grapes that protect the plants against biotic and abiotic stresses. Red grapes have a larger concentration of flavonoids than other types of grapes. The flavonols, anthocyanins, flavan-3-ols derivatives of flavonoids, tannins, and pigments are concentrated in the outer layer of the grape skin. The seeds contain tannins, flavan-3-ol derivatives, and flavan-3-ol oligomers such as procyanidins. Tannins and proanthocyanidins are also abundant in grapes.

Anthocyanins. Anthocyanins are glycosides and acyl glycosides of anthocyanidins. These are the natural pigments responsible for the red, blue, purple, orange, green, and pink colors of grapes. The darker color of grapes is associated with higher contents of anthocyanins present in the grape skin. The major anthocyanidins found in grapes are pelargonidin, cyanidin, delphinidin, petunidin, peonidin, and malvidin.

Proanthocyanidins. Grape seeds are a rich source of proanthocyanidins, which are polyhydroxyflavan oligomers or polymers. These compounds primarily consist of catechin, epicatechin, epicatechin 3-gallate, epigallocatechin, and trace amounts of gallocatechin. The levels of catechin and epicatechin are higher in the dark colored grapes, and they play a key role in influencing the astringency, color stability, and bitterness of grapes.

Stilbenes. Stilbenes are the phytoalexins naturally found in some edible plants, including grapes. Distinct types of stilbenes have been identified in grapes including cis- and trans-resveratrol, resveratrol-3-O-beta-d-glucopyranoside known as piceid, resveratrol dimers known as viniferins, and piceatannol. Resveratrol is the most widely investigated stilbene in grapes that possess multiple biological activities.

The presence of different phytochemicals like phenolic acids, flavonoids, proanthocyanidins, and stilbenes bestows grapes with beneficial biological properties that are further discussed in the following section.

Biological Properties of Grapes. Grape constituents have been shown to have outstanding antioxidant properties, both in vitro and in vivo. Grapes are known to enhance cellular antioxidant defenses, particularly through polyphenolic compounds that influence redox signaling pathways. For example, a study has shown that 13 Spanish red and white grape varieties exhibit antioxidant potential, depending on the part of the grape used, such as the pulp, peel, or seeds. This was attributed to the varied amount of total phenolic content in different grape parts. Researchers have utilized various in vitro methodologies to measure the antioxidant capabilities of grapes, revealing a significant capacity determined by D P P H, A B T S, F R A P methods, and the beta-carotene and linoleic acid auto-oxidation assay. Among different mechanisms, proanthocyanidins contribute to the antioxidant activity of grapes mostly through modulating the relevant signaling pathways, such as the Nrf2 and P I 3 K and Akt pathways, and boosting the activity of endogenous antioxidant enzymes. Resveratrol exerts its antioxidant effect by scavenging hydroxyl radicals, nitric oxide, superoxide anion, and peroxynitrite and improves redox equilibrium by activating the Nrf2 pathway, which upregulates the endogenous antioxidant pathways.

Further, grape polyphenols not only regulate oxidative stress but also modulate inflammatory redox signaling pathways. Skin diseases are often associated with an inflammatory cascade that is intimately tied to oxidative stress. The anti-inflammatory mechanisms of grape constituents are studied in different disease models besides skin diseases. Flavanols and procyanidins are shown to inhibit the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and alter the associated signaling pathways, such as phospholipase A2, cyclooxygenase-2, N F-kappa B, and T N F-mediated inflammation. Whole grape powder has been shown to markedly reduce the symptoms of inflammatory arthritis in transgenic mice overexpressing T N F alpha and decreased human T N F-mediated inflammation. Similarly, grape peel powder was found to mitigate the inflammatory response by downregulating the N F-kappa B pathway and reduce the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines like T N F beta, T N F-alpha, and I L-6 and chemokines like I L-8 and macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha. The grape flavonoids quercetin, catechin, and epigallocatechin are shown to inhibit N F-kappa B, T N F alpha, I L-1 beta, I L-6, and I L-8 in mast cells, coronary endothelia cells, and skin cells, suggesting that these substances have a protective function against inflammation. In addition, grape stilbenes such as resveratrol suppress inflammation in acute pharyngitis, ear edema, carrageenan-induced synovitis, and neuroinflammation by suppressing N F-kappa B, T N F alpha, I L-6, M I P-2, and C O X-2 activity levels.

In summary, numerous studies have demonstrated the anti-inflammatory properties of grape constituents. A reduction in the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as T N F alpha, I L-6, and I L-1 beta, and the modulation of associated signaling pathways, including P P A R-gamma and C O X-2, M A P K, and N F-kappa B pathways, are some of the mechanisms by which grapes reduce inflammation.

Antimicrobial Activity. The polyphenols in grapes have demonstrated antibacterial properties against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, and their bactericidal effects were greater against Gram-positive bacteria than Gram-negative ones. It has recently been reported that two natural polyphenols, resveratrol and epigallocatechin-3-gallate, are useful in the treatment of inflammatory acne. Resveratrol was shown to inhibit the growth of Propionibacterium acnes, and its combination with benzoyl peroxide sustained bacterial growth inhibition. Grape muscadine skin extracts contain quercetin and resveratrol, both of which inhibit Helicobacter pylori. This action may be due to disruption of the bacterial cell wall or cell membrane. Resveratrol has been linked to antiviral, antifungal, and anti-polyomavirus properties. Moreover, studies have revealed significant antimicrobial activity across different growth stages of grape seeds. Notably, the immature seed fraction demonstrated the strongest antimicrobial activity, which was again attributed to the polyphenolic content of grape seeds.

Wound Healing Activity. Wound healing requires the restoration of the functional barrier, which depends on the successful regeneration of new skin and contraction and closure of the wound. During the inflammatory stage of wound healing, phagocytic cells destroy invading pathogens and produce reactive oxygen species. However, excessive reactive oxygen species can limit the process of healing. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities of grape phytochemicals protect the wounds from oxidative stress and limit chronic damage induced by inflammation. Nayak and colleagues showed that the topical application of grape seed proanthocyanidins supports wound healing. The authors used an excision wound model in rats and observed that grape skin powder significantly enhanced the rate of wound contraction and decreased the period of epithelialization and skin regeneration. It was due to the higher content of hydroxyproline, which is known for its wound healing properties.

Another study reported that topical application of grape seed proanthocyanidins upregulate inducible vascular endothelial growth factor transcription in human keratinocytes, which is necessary to stimulate angiogenesis in wounds, thereby accelerating the healing process. Resveratrol has also demonstrated accelerated wound healing and improved angiogenesis. A study conducted by Lakshmanan and colleagues showed that topical application of resveratrol increased vascular endothelial growth factor and improved wound healing process in C57BL/6 mice. Similar results were obtained in another study, where resveratrol reduced the wound surface area in pigs in a dose-dependent manner.

Antiaging, Anti-pigmentation, and Photoprotection Activities. The antiaging activity of resveratrol, quercetin, and proanthocyanidins in grapes is linked to their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, which follow various mechanisms. For example, aqueous extract of grape leaves inhibits I L-8 secretion from human keratinocytes induced by pro-inflammatory stimuli, such as ultraviolet B, T N F alpha, and lipopolysaccharide. This was modulated by decreasing N F-kappa B-driven transcription of inflammatory mediators in keratinocytes. This shows that grape leaves extract can help protect the skin from ultraviolet radiation, which is also a common cause of the early onset of wrinkles and dark spots.

Ultraviolet B radiation is known to induce reactive oxygen species, which activates three skin aging pathways: matrix metalloproteinase-1; M A P K and activator protein 1 and N F-kappa B, C O X-2-mediated inflammation; and p53 and Bax and cytochrome C-mediated apoptosis in the skin. Ultraviolet radiation causes the release of T N F alpha and I L-1 and, in turn, activates N F-kappa B, facilitating the formation of activator protein 1 transcription factor complex. It increases matrix metalloproteinases that degrade collagen, elastin, and other extracellular matrix components and interfere with intracellular signaling pathways that control the production of extracellular matrix components by fibroblasts. Consequently, there is a breakdown of elastin and hyaluronic acid, as well as the deterioration of collagen types one and three, which incurs fibrillar skin lesions.

An in vivo study conducted in mice has shown that resveratrol could inhibit the expression of activator protein 1 and N F-kappa B transcription factors, which limits skin inflammation and the breakdown of extracellular matrix components, such as collagen and elastin. This was supported by another study in human dermal fibroblast cells and reconstructed human skin tissue model, where resveratrol reduced the levels of matrix metalloproteinase-1, I L-6, C O X-2, and other inflammatory cascades, preventing inflammation-induced skin aging. Resveratrol has also been shown to inhibit lipid oxidation, regulate keratinocyte viability and proliferation, lower malondialdehyde levels, and shield antioxidant cellular enzymes, such as glutathione peroxidase and superoxide dismutase, all of which contribute to its antiaging property.

Resveratrol impedes melanin synthesis by modulating tyrosinase activity and posttranscriptional regulation of melanogenic genes. Resveratrol has been shown to suppress the messenger ribonucleic acid expression of melanogenic genes including MITF, DCT, TYR, TYRP1, and TYRP2 in human melanocytes. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that resveratrol activates the Nrf2 and A R E pathway, which in turn activates the P I 3 K and Akt signaling pathway, hence negatively regulating melanogenesis. It was reported that the topical application of resveratrol can significantly reduce ultraviolet-induced pigmentation. It increases procollagen 1 and decreases the activity of matrix metalloproteinase-1 in fibroblasts, protecting them from ultraviolet B radiations.

This evidence suggests that grapes are emerging as promising candidates for cosmetic and dermatological applications, attributed to their rich content of phytochemicals, especially polyphenols, which offer a range of biological activities and health-promoting benefits.

Role of Grapes or Grape Constituents in Skin Diseases. Skin diseases are among the most common health conditions. These disorders arise from a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors, with the contribution of each element varying depending on the specific condition. Phytochemicals from natural sources, such as those found in grapes, hold considerable promise in addressing these conditions. Grape constituents have been shown to exhibit multiple biological activities and modulate important signaling events, which may protect against a variety of skin diseases. Some of these activities are described below.

Effects of Grapes on Melanoma. Melanoma is one of the deadliest skin cancers caused by the hyperproliferation of pigment-producing cells called melanocytes. There are multiple types of melanomas, out of which cutaneous melanoma is the most prevalent. It is characterized by asymmetrical pigmented skin areas associated with genetic mutations or chronic exposure to ultraviolet radiation. Multiple driver gene mutations are involved in the development of melanoma. The most common mutations are found in BRAF and NRAS, which are key players in the M A P K signaling pathway. A significant fraction of melanomas also harbor mutations in CDNK2A, NF1, MIFT, RAC1, PPP6C, STK19, and PTEN, which are key components of pigmentation-related pathway, cell-cycle regulation, Akt pathway, epigenetic factors, and others. Although significant advancements have been made in the treatment and control of melanoma, drug resistance, relapse, and side effects are challenges to optimal cure, leaving room for further improvement. Plant-derived products such as taxanes are currently used in the management of cancer, and a myriad of phytochemicals are under investigation for their therapeutic potential.

Grape phytochemicals are shown to exhibit anticancer properties. A study showed that the grape pomace extracts from red wine grapes, Vitis vinifera, exhibited in vitro antioxidant effect that reduced inflammation-induced oxidative stress. It also impeded the proliferation of murine melanoma cells, and this activity was attributed to its high polyphenol content. Similarly, the methanol extract of a wild grape species, Vitis amurensis, also displayed an anti-melanogenic effect, significantly inhibiting tyrosinase activity, oxidative stress, and melanin production in murine melanoma cells primarily due to the active compound, betulinic acid. Additionally, grape seed extract and red wine have been shown to reduce pulmonary metastasis in mice inoculated with melanoma cells. Some of the major active compounds for these antiproliferative effects include resveratrol, piceatannol, catechin, anthocyanins, and proanthocyanidins, which are discussed below.

Effects of Resveratrol and Its Derivatives on Melanoma. In the last few decades, resveratrol has garnered significant attention for its broad spectrum of biological activities including antiproliferative potential. Resveratrol has been shown to have apoptosis-inducing activity, cell cycle modulatory effects, anti-inflammatory effects, and the ability to modulate protein kinase signaling, among other events. In the context of melanoma, resveratrol has been shown to exert its antiproliferative response by targeting multiple signaling pathways, such as extracellular growth factors and receptor tyrosine kinases, E G F, T G F-beta, p53; multiprotein complexes, P T E N and Akt, M E K and E R K; cell metabolism, redox imbalance; cell cycle regulation; and integrin signaling.

One of the key mutations in melanoma is in the BRAF gene, which causes persistent activation of the M E K and E R K pathway, leading to uncontrolled cell proliferation. This pathway is also activated by alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, which regulates melanogenesis and immune responses in melanoma. A study has shown that resveratrol inhibits melanoma cell growth and induces apoptosis by phosphorylating and inhibiting the M E K and E R K pathway in melanoma cells. It also downregulates alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and its downstream regulators, such as beta-catenin, c-Kit, and MITF, which are essential for melanin synthesis. At effective concentrations, resveratrol alone or in combination with imatinib has been shown to inhibit the viability and invasion capacity of melanoma cells.

A recent study has shown that resveratrol downregulated the phosphorylation of E R K 1 and 2 by inhibiting S H C binding and spindle-associated 1 expression in melanoma cells. This, in turn, modulates the expression of cell cycle cyclins A, E, and B1, with subsequent irreversible arrest of the cells in the S phase resulting in apoptosis. In addition, resveratrol was also shown to target the P T E N and Akt pathway, which is frequently dysregulated in melanoma. Resveratrol was found to decrease the phosphorylation of Akt, m T O R, and F O X O, subsequently preventing the translocation of F O X O to the nucleus and its activation. It was found that treatment with resveratrol decreased tumor growth and metastasis, with downregulation of Akt signaling in a syngenic mouse model of melanoma.

Similarly, resveratrol treatment has also been shown to effectively inhibit melanoma metastasis in the lungs, with decreased angiogenesis and tumor infiltration by regulatory T cells. Regulatory T cells are known to impair the ability of immune system to fight tumors, and their inhibition by resveratrol supports the immune-mediated suppression of melanoma cells. Furthermore, resveratrol treatment was found to increase the basal expression of dihydronicotinamide riboside quinone reductase 2, potentially contributing to enhanced p53 expression and growth suppression in melanoma cells.

Interestingly, resveratrol's antiproliferative effects have also been shown to be mediated via a pro-oxidant response. Treatment of malignant melanoma cells with high dose of resveratrol was shown to increase reactive oxygen species-mediated expression of phosphorylated p38 M A P K, triggering both p53 and E R stress pathways. This led to increased expression levels of phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor-2 alpha and C/EBP homologous protein, which in turn upregulated pro-apoptotic proteins Bax, p21, and p27 while downregulating anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2 and cyclin B. These changes contributed to the growth inhibition and cell cycle arrest in malignant melanoma cells.

Another study revealed that resveratrol induces melanoma cell apoptosis by targeting M2-type pyruvate kinase-mediated E R stress and mitochondrial fission, independent of p53. It suppressed pyruvate kinase M2 and phosphorylation of upstream E R K 1 and 2, which then fails to stabilize Bcl-2, leading to its degradation and the release of cytochrome c. Hence, resveratrol downregulates E R K and pyruvate kinase M2 and Bcl-2 axis in malignant melanoma cells to induce apoptosis.

Derivatives of resveratrol, such as pterostilbene, labruscol, and epsilon-viniferin, have also been shown to have growth inhibitory effects in melanoma. These derivatives have been shown to cause a S-phase cell cycle arrest by modulating cyclins A, E, and D1 as well as their associated cyclin-dependent kinases 1 and 2, leading to reduced melanoma cell viability and invasiveness. Overall, studies in a variety of experimental models suggest that resveratrol and its derivatives have antiproliferative effects in melanoma and require further investigation and validation in preclinical and clinical models.

Effects of Piceatannol on Melanoma. Piceatannol, a resveratrol analog found in grapes, has shown potential anti-melanoma activity. It inhibits melanogenesis in melanoma cells by suppressing tyrosinase activity and oxidative stress. Further, piceatannol was shown to induce a G2/M phase arrest in melanoma cells. A recent study has shown that piceatannol can reduce the proliferation, migration, and invasion of melanoma cells and inhibit tumor growth in a xenograft model by inhibiting the phosphorylation of Syk and decreasing the expression of key proteins involved in tumor progression, such as matrix metalloproteinase-2, matrix metalloproteinase-9, and vascular endothelial growth factor. Piceatannol was also shown to inhibit J A K-1, which is a key member of the S T A T pathway that is crucial for controlling cellular activities in response to extracellular cytokines and is a C O X-2-inducible enzyme involved in inflammation and carcinogenesis. Additional research is needed to fully understand the underlying mechanisms of piceatannol's antiproliferative responses against melanoma.

Effects of Grape Seed Proanthocyanidins on Melanoma. Grape seed proanthocyanidins, a group of oligomeric flavonoids, have been evaluated for their effects against melanoma. In vitro studies have shown that these compounds inhibit the growth of human melanoma cells by reducing the expression of beta-catenin, a key protein involved in cell proliferation and survival. These phytochemicals also suppress the tumor promoter miRNA-106b, resulting in the inhibition of cell proliferation and G1-phase cell cycle arrest. In addition, dietary supplementation of grape seed proanthocyanidins has been shown to impede melanoma tumor growth in xenograft mouse models. Another study revealed that grape seed proanthocyanidins inhibited tumor growth in a xenograft model by inhibiting beta-catenin. Also, grape seed proanthocyanidins inhibited melanoma cell migration by suppressing C O X-2, blocking inflammation-mediated activation of beta-catenin and reducing the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2, matrix metalloproteinase-9, and MITF, which are critical for melanoma metastasis. It was reported that grape seed proanthocyanidins containing hydrogel scaffolds can function as a natural photothermal agent for melanoma therapy and as a bioactive biomaterial for wound healing. Under near-infrared laser stimulation, the photothermal effect of grape seed proanthocyanidins containing hydrogel scaffolds effectively resulted in the apoptosis and necrosis of melanoma tumor cells in vitro. These data support the grape seed proanthocyanidins anti-melanoma potential; however, further detailed studies are required to determine their efficacy in preclinical and clinical settings.

Other Grape Phytochemicals on Melanoma. Besides resveratrol and proanthocyanidins, there are multiple other phytochemicals in grapes that have shown antiproliferative effects in melanoma models. For example, among novel catechin derivatives, 4 beta-(S-cysteinyl)epicatechin-3-O-gallate derived from grapes exhibited strong antioxidant activity and significantly reduced melanoma cell viability by inducing S phase arrest and apoptosis. Additionally, epicatechin-(4 beta-8)-epicatechin 3-O-gallate, a unique compound found in grapes, has been shown to effectively inhibit both tyrosinase activity and melanogenesis. In addition, procyanidin C1, an epicatechin trimeric flavonoid found in grapes, has been shown to inhibit the proliferation of melanoma cells through activation of the laminin receptor signaling pathway. Some other phytochemicals such as anthocyanins and cinnamic acid have shown antiproliferative properties by increasing oxidative stress, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced cell proliferation in melanoma cells.

Similarly, fisetin, a flavonoid present in various fruits including grapes, is extensively studied for its anti-inflammatory and anticancer properties. Recently, the role of fisetin in melanogenesis and melanoma has garnered interest. Fisetin was shown to suppress MITF, an oncogene amplified in metastatic melanomas, while also downregulating nuclear beta-catenin and inhibiting the corresponding Wnt signaling pathways. Its anti-melanoma effects were also validated in melanoma xenograft models.

In summary, there is a wealth of evidence that documents the anti-melanoma potential of grape-derived phytochemicals, including resveratrol, piceatannol, fisetin, and grape seed proanthocyanidins. Further studies, including pharmacokinetics evaluation and human clinical trials, are required to explore the potential of the above discussed phytochemicals in melanoma.

Effects of Grapes on Non-melanoma Skin Cancer. Non-melanoma skin cancers, including basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, are primarily caused by ultraviolet radiation, a well-established environmental carcinogen. The increasing incidence of non-melanoma skin cancers, particularly among older populations and individuals with prolonged ultraviolet exposure, has prompted increased interest of researchers towards novel chemopreventive strategies to combat these neoplasms. Among the promising candidates for protection against ultraviolet-induced skin damage are grape-derived compounds. Most of the research relevant to grapes in this direction has focused on resveratrol, though a few studies have examined whole grapes or combinations of grape phytochemicals. Recent studies have demonstrated the chemoprotective effects of grape powder against ultraviolet B-induced skin tumorigenesis. For example, a short-term study using male and female SKH-1 mice revealed that grape powder supplementation significantly protected against early-stage skin lesions. These effects were observed in both sexes, indicating that grape powder offers protection across genders. In a long-term study, grape powder reduced tumor counts, malignant conversion, and associated markers of inflammation, such as serum I g E and eotaxin. Further, inhibition of p38 phosphorylation and reduced P C N A, Ki67, and B C L 2 levels were also observed. Additionally, in another study, topical application of grape seed extracts significantly inhibited ultraviolet B-induced sunburn cells and cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, which are markers of D N A damage. It also reduced the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines T N F alpha and I L-6 while protecting the skin from ultraviolet-induced damage. These findings highlight the effectiveness of whole grapes or grape constituents in skin cancer.

More research on the utility of whole grapes on cancer prevention and cancer treatment endpoints is needed. Some of the investigations done in individual grape constituents are discussed below.

Effects of Resveratrol on Non-melanoma Skin Cancer. Phytochemicals in grapes, particularly resveratrol, have a myriad of activities on cellular processes that may translate into anticancer or cancer prevention activity. Resveratrol has been extensively studied in vitro and in vivo for its anticancer potential against non-melanoma skin cancer through various mechanisms, including the induction of apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, inhibition of cell proliferation, modulation of protein kinase signaling and effect on oxidative stress, and inflammation. Resveratrol has shown significant potential in preventing ultraviolet B-induced skin damage by modulating redox balance, inflammatory responses, and cell cycle progression. Resveratrol has been shown to significantly enhance the effectiveness of traditional chemotherapeutic agents, such as 5-fluorouracil, in the animal model of skin cancer. It was observed that topical application of a lipid nanosystem-based gel containing resveratrol and 5-fluorouracil significantly reduced ultraviolet-mediated skin hyperplasia, edema, and phototoxicity, leading to lower tumor incidence and delayed onset of tumorigenesis in the animal model of skin cancer. Similarly, in a two-stage D M B A-initiated and T P A-promoted murine skin cancer model, resveratrol showed a 98 percent decrease in skin cancer. Similar results were obtained by Soleas and colleagues employing the same animal model, where topical application of resveratrol solution on the skin of mice showed a 60 percent decrease in papillomas. Resveratrol has been shown to exert its effects against non-melanoma skin cancer through various mechanisms in ultraviolet-induced skin cancer model in SKH-1 hairless mice, including reduction of the cell cycle regulators, hyperphosphorylated pRb proteins, M E K 1 and E R K 1 and 2, and A P-1 signaling pathways. It was shown to induce G1-phase cell cycle arrest and upregulate the tumor suppressor p21 and W A F 1 and C I P 1, contributing to its anticancer activity. Resveratrol was shown to decrease the skin hyperplasia induced by multiple ultraviolet B exposures in SKH-1 hairless mice. These effects were accompanied by reduced levels of cyclins D1 and D2; Cdk 2, 4, and 6; P C N A; and an increase in p21 and W A F 1 and C I P 1. In addition, there was inhibited expression of anti-apoptotic proteins and markers of tumor promotion, C O X-2, and ornithine decarboxylase in the same model. Recently, resveratrol-loaded invasomal gels have shown higher skin penetration and better inhibition of tumor growth compared to other formulations in an animal model of squamous cell carcinoma. Taken together, resveratrol has a potential in the management of non-melanoma skin cancer by targeting multiple mechanisms. Further research including clinical studies is necessary to fully establish its safety, efficacy, and optimal dosing.

Effects of Grape Seed Proanthocyanidins on Non-melanoma Skin Cancer. Multiple other components of grapes are shown to possess antiproliferative effects. The grape seed proanthocyanidins have been shown to protect against photo-carcinogenesis as shown by reduced tumor incidence, tumor multiplicity, and tumor size in SKH-1 hairless mice. It inhibits malignant conversion of benign skin papilloma to carcinoma in SKH-1 hairless mice exposed to ultraviolet B radiation. It has been demonstrated that ultraviolet B-induced oxidative stress may increase the rate of malignant transformation by enhancing genetic instability, which in turn speeds up the evolution of non-malignant lesions. It appears that grape seed proanthocyanidins mitigate the malignant transformation via reducing oxidative stress and its associated damage. In addition, grape seed proanthocyanidins have been shown to inhibit the proliferation of squamous cell carcinoma cells in a dose-dependent manner and to suppress the mobility and invasiveness of these cells by downregulating matrix metalloproteinase-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-9. Moreover, evidence shows the induction of both autophagic and apoptotic machinery in squamous cell carcinoma cells upon treatment with grape seed proanthocyanidins. Additionally, proanthocyanidins target the hsa_circ_0070934 and miR-136-5p and P R A F 2 axis to hinder the proliferation, migration, and cell cycle processes while causing apoptosis in squamous cell carcinoma cells. The circ R N A was shown to be an important participant in squamous cell carcinoma progression. It is associated with downregulation of miR-136-5p and higher P R A F 2 levels, both of which indicate poor prognosis for cancer patients. Grape seed proanthocyanidins restrained the progression of squamous cell carcinoma by promoting miR-136-5p while decreasing the expression of P R A F 2. Previously, it was shown that proanthocyanidins can reverse epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and impede cell invasion via inhibition of the phosphorylation of E R K 1 and 2 and E G F R in head and neck cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Together, the studies provide evidence for the potential chemopreventive efficacy of grape seed proanthocyanidins against non-melanoma skin cancer.

Effects of Grapes on Atopic Dermatitis. Atopic dermatitis is a chronic, inflammatory skin disorder that affects millions of people worldwide and is characterized by skin lesions, pruritus, and impaired skin barrier function. The pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis is complex, involving immune system dysregulation, infiltration of inflammatory mediators, and epidermal barrier dysfunction. Among the multiple mediators of atopic dermatitis, filaggrin protein, keratinocytes, T cells, mast cells, and other signaling molecules such as I L-4, I L-13, and thymic stromal lymphopoietin are significant for its pathogenesis. Traditional therapies, such as corticosteroids and immunotherapy, are often associated with side effects, leading to the need for alternative, safer treatments.

In recent years, natural compounds, including those derived from grapes, have been studied for their potential benefits in atopic dermatitis owing to their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Grape's antioxidants can counteract the oxidative stress associated with atopic dermatitis and help to protect skin cells from reactive oxygen species-induced inflammation. Studies have demonstrated that dried grape powder is effective in preventing and treating atopic dermatitis-like symptoms in murine models. In a study using diets containing 3 percent and 5 percent grape powder in 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene-induced atopic dermatitis in NC/NgaTndCrlj mice, researchers observed a significant reduction in the symptoms of atopic dermatitis, such as decreases in lesions, epidermal thickness, skin ulceration, and immune cell infiltration. Since atopic dermatitis is characterized by infiltration of immune cells and cytokines that cause barrier defects and inflammation, grape powder's ability to modulate these responses is noteworthy. It was found that grape powder alleviated atopic dermatitis-associated inflammation by decreasing the levels of cytokines I L-4, I L-5, I L-6, I F N gamma, and T N F alpha and chemokines C X C L 1, C X C L 10, C C L 2, C C L 3, C C L 4, and C X C L 2. Grape powder was found to modulate beta-catenin, Nrf2, V E G F A, E G F R, and matrix metalloproteinase-9, which have been implicated in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. The grape antioxidant quercetin has also been shown to reduce I L-6 and inhibit matrix metalloproteinase-9 along with the E R K 1 and 2 and N F-kappa B pathways in atopic dermatitis models. Similarly, topical cream containing grape seed extract, rich in procyanidins and flavonoids, showed significant reductions in eczema severity and pruritus in individuals with mild-to-moderate atopic dermatitis. This treatment led to improved skin hydration and reduced transepidermal water loss, suggesting a beneficial effect on the skin barrier function. These results support the potential of grapes as the target for the management of atopic dermatitis. More studies are required to determine the exact mechanism by which grapes modulate signaling pathways to inhibit atopic dermatitis and its effectiveness in human patients.

Anti-inflammatory and Skin Remodeling Effects of Resveratrol on Atopic Dermatitis. Resveratrol has been extensively studied in the treatment of inflammatory disorders, leading to a deeper understanding of its pharmacological properties and possible therapeutic applications. Owing to its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, resveratrol can aid people with atopic dermatitis in managing their illness by lowering skin inflammation, itching, and the intensity of skin lesions. Some of the related studies are discussed below.

In a mouse model of atopic dermatitis induced by house dust mite extract, resveratrol was shown to significantly reduce the severity of atopic dermatitis-like skin lesions, as well as reduce epidermal hyperplasia, mast cell infiltration, and inflammatory cell migration. It also inhibited key inflammatory markers such as T N F alpha, I L-1 beta, I L-4, and I F N gamma through the inhibition of N F-kappa B, P I 3 K and Akt, and J A K and S T A T pathways. Furthermore, resveratrol modulated the high mobility group box 1 pathway, suggesting that high mobility group box 1 could be a potential therapeutic target in atopic dermatitis. Mast cells play a crucial role in the initiation and progression of inflammation in atopic dermatitis. Moon and colleagues studied the effect of resveratrol on the regulation of thymic stromal lymphopoietin, a pro-inflammatory cytokine released by mast cells that contribute to the impairment of the epidermal barrier and innate immunity in atopic dermatitis. It was demonstrated that resveratrol treatment reduced the production of thymic stromal lymphopoietin in conjunction with the downregulation of N F-kappa B. Additionally, resveratrol decreased the activation of the S1P-producing enzyme sphingosine kinase 1 and S T A T 3, both of which are involved in mast cell-mediated skin remodeling in atopic dermatitis. Through its action on epithelial cytokines and epithelial apoptosis, resveratrol can effectively alleviate histological changes and inflammation associated with atopic dermatitis. The results of these studies provide a strong rationale to thoroughly investigate the mechanism of action of resveratrol in atopic dermatitis. In addition, clinical studies are needed to prove the efficacy of resveratrol in atopic dermatitis patients.

Anti-inflammatory and Immune-Modulating Effects of Piceatannol on Atopic Dermatitis. Piceatannol has also been found to be beneficial against atopic dermatitis. In a study conducted on NC/Nga mice, atopic dermatitis-like skin lesions were induced by repeated topical application of Dermatophagoides farinae extract on mice skin. Later topical treatment with piceatannol solution attenuated the development of atopic dermatitis-like symptoms by reducing skin thickness, inflammation, itching, rash, and skin water loss in atopic dermatitis lesion in mice. At cellular and molecular levels, piceatannol inhibited the immune cell infiltration and the release of pro-inflammatory markers from the thymus, downregulating the expression of various chemokines and cytokines involved in atopic dermatitis pathogenesis. In this study, piceatannol was found to suppress the J A K and S T A T signaling, a key regulator of the cytokine signaling pathway. J A K and S T A T signaling controls the interaction between I g E and mast cells as well as the production of I L-4 and I L-3 that are necessary for the development of atopic dermatitis. Additionally, another in vitro study in isolated enzyme has shown that piceatannol is an inhibitor of Syk tyrosine kinase, which is crucial for the release of inflammatory mediators from mast cells. Lee and colleagues suggested that piceatannol may play an important role as a multi-inhibitor for J A K 1, Syk, and P I 3 K in atopic dermatitis. However, additional preclinical and clinical studies are needed to validate these findings in appropriate models.

Effects of Other Grape Phytochemicals on Atopic Dermatitis. Tannic acid, another phenolic compound abundant in grapes, has shown potential for the treatment of atopic dermatitis. In a study, tannic acid significantly alleviated atopic dermatitis-like symptoms, including skin inflammation and immune cell infiltration. It down-regulated the expression of inflammatory markers T N F alpha, I L-1 beta, high mobility group box 1, and receptor for advanced glycation end products. Additionally, tannic acid induced the expression of P P A R gamma, a nuclear receptor involved in regulating immune responses and skin barrier function. These findings suggest that tannic acid could act through the N F-kappa B signaling pathway and P P A R gamma activation to mitigate inflammation in atopic dermatitis. In addition, Bangash and colleagues have studied the effect of pterostilbene, a phytoalexin structurally similar to resveratrol, in an animal model of atopic dermatitis. Pterostilbene is present in grapevines and has been shown to have anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anticancer effects. Bangash and colleagues demonstrated that pterostilbene treatment reduced ear inflammation, skin thickness, and the weight and size of the thymus glands and spleen in mice. Moreover, pterostilbene improved the expression of oxidative stress markers in the skin and decreased inflammatory markers. Overall, pterostilbene alleviated atopic dermatitis symptoms by reducing inflammation, inflammatory cytokines, and oxidative damage in the skin of mice.

Together, these findings highlight the potential of grape-derived compounds for the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Preclinical evidence supports the idea that grape supplements could be a safer alternative to conventional therapies. However, more detailed preclinical and clinical studies are needed to validate these promising results.

Effects of Grapes on Psoriasis. Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory debilitating disease characterized by immune system dysregulation and excessive production of pro-inflammatory mediators. This autoimmune disorder results in the release of inflammatory mediators such as T N F alpha, I L-12, and I L-23 and the activation of Th22, Th1, and Th17 from immune cells. These cytokines, especially I L-17, activate the abnormal proliferation of keratinocytes, initiating and exacerbating epidermal hyperplasia and persistent inflammation. While therapies that target T N F alpha, I L-17, and I L-23 have demonstrated remarkable efficacy in treating psoriasis, concerns about the adverse effects, safety, and recurrence of the disease have driven the search for alternative therapies.

Although limited in quantity, recent research has shown the potential of grape-derived compounds, especially resveratrol and its oligomers, in the management of psoriasis. One study used pro-inflammatory cytokines to stimulate the proliferation and differentiation of keratinocytes similar to psoriasis. It was seen that treatment with grape-leaves water extracts significantly inhibited I L-8 secretion and V E G F production in keratinocytes. Grape extracts reduced inflammation by downregulating N F-kappa B-driven transcription of inflammatory mediators. Another study on psoriasis-like skin inflammation in mice documented resveratrol's efficacy in lowering inflammation. It inhibited key inflammatory cytokines such as I L-1 beta, I L-6, and C X C L 8 in keratinocytes activated by imiquimod, an immune response modifier that causes psoriasis-like skin lesions. Moreover, it was also shown that the regulation of F O X O transcription factors by resveratrol may play a role in angiogenesis and healing psoriasis lesions, which could be further explored for psoriasis treatment. Research on resveratrol oligomers, such as epsilon-viniferin, ampelopsin C, and vitisin A, extracted from Vitis thunbergii roots, has demonstrated that viniferin exhibits higher deposition in psoriasis-like mouse skin compared to monomeric resveratrol and other oligomers. It was particularly effective in reducing I L-23 secretion and alleviating psoriasis-like symptoms more effectively than resveratrol. The authors suggested that resveratrol oligomers may provide an enhanced bioavailability and therapeutic potential for psoriasis treatment.

In another study, the extract E F L A 945 from red grapevine leaves was shown to restrict the A I M 2 inflammasome activation in imiquimod-induced psoriasis mouse model. A I M 2 is highly expressed in psoriatic lesions, and the entry of degraded-self D N A into the inflammasome triggers A I M 2-dependent release of I L-1 beta and I L-18 in keratinocytes, thus aggravating inflammation and skin lesions. It was found that E F L A 945, which contains resveratrol and peonidin 3-O-glucoside, interfered with the entry of extracellular D N A into the cells, thereby ameliorating the inflammation in psoriatic lesions. E F L A 945 effectively reduced caspase-1 activation and I L-1 beta maturation in imiquimod-induced psoriasis mouse model, further highlighting the potential of grape-derived compounds in managing psoriasis. In conclusion, grapes, with their rich array of polyphenols, offer significant benefits for skin health due to their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and immunomodulatory properties. Grape extracts and polyphenols, including proanthocyanidins, resveratrol, piceatannol, and others, have shown promise in combating skin diseases by protecting the skin from environmental pollutants, promoting collagen synthesis, reducing skin inflammation, and accelerating skin regeneration and healing. However, efforts are needed for the translation of these findings from the bench to the bedside. Interestingly, grape constituents are already in use in various cosmetic products, as discussed below.

Grape Extracts or Phytochemicals as Ingredients in Cosmetics. Plant-derived ingredients have been a cornerstone of skincare for hundreds of years. This applies to grapes too, which are used as skin-conditioning agents, antioxidants, fragrances, and colorants in cosmetics. According to the CosIng database, which is a European Commission database for information on cosmetic substances and ingredients, the fruits and roots of grapes are utilized as skin-conditioning agents, while the seeds are used for their skin protection, skin-conditioning, antibacterial, antioxidant, and anti-seborrheic properties. The grape seed oil has emollient properties, whereas the stem is used for its antioxidant and photoprotection properties. Grape leaves are highly valued in cosmetic formulations as a source of fragrance.

Grapes are particularly valued for their mildness and minimal skin-irritating properties, making them ideal for sensitive skin formulations for potential skin benefits, including antiaging, photoprotection, and antioxidative properties. Since, in general, cosmetic products must be tested for safety before they can be marketed, efforts have been made to ensure the safety of grape extracts and compounds. The cytotoxicity and skin compatibility of grape extracts have been validated in vitro in numerous investigations. For example, it has been demonstrated that formulations containing grape extracts do not cause cytotoxicity to keratinocytes and fibroblasts, suggesting their suitability for topical formulations. Further, clinical research has shown that formulations containing grape polyphenols can increase skin moisture and minimize wrinkles without causing adverse side effects. The Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel evaluated the safety of 24 grape-derived ingredients in cosmetics and concluded that they are safe for use in their currently used concentrations below 1 to 3 percent. In a dermal irritation test on human skin, extracts from grape fruit, juice, and seeds at concentrations up to 1 to 3 percent showed no signs of irritation or sensitization. Similarly, a two-week human study involving products with 0.15 percent grape seed extract demonstrated no irritation. The Cosmetic Ingredient Review's safety assessments were based on available clinical and animal data, as well as historical safety evaluations of grape-derived constituents such as resveratrol and other polyphenols. These findings provide a foundation for the continued use of grape-based ingredients in cosmetic formulations. Grape seed powder, seed extract, seed oil, skin extract, stem extract, wine lees, pomace, and isolated resveratrol and flavonoids are readily incorporated into a wide range of skincare products such as serums, creams, masks, toners, hair oils, oral care products, and sunscreens.

Uses of Grape Formulations for Photoprotection and Sunscreens. Cosmetic products based on grape-derived components are popular in many countries. One of the applications of grape-derived components in cosmetics is their role in photoprotection. A study investigating the photoprotective effects of whole grape powder in mice found that these extracts could significantly reduce ultraviolet-induced skin damage and inflammation. Grape seed extracts have shown significant photostabilizing effects when incorporated into sunscreen formulations. It improves the photostability of common ultraviolet filters, such as benzophenone-3 and ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate, and enhances the broad-spectrum protection offered by sunscreen products. Sunscreen formulations containing both grape seed extracts and ultraviolet filters showed an increase in S P F values and maintained a broad-spectrum protection even after exposure to ultraviolet irradiation. These formulations also demonstrated improved photostability, which is often a limitation of conventional ultraviolet filters. In one study, extracts from the Obeidi variety of Lebanese grapes with high proanthocyanidin content were incorporated into commercial creams. These extracts not only maintained stability but also significantly enhanced the antioxidant and photoprotection capacity of the formulations. Another sunscreen formulation containing the grape seed extract was tested in Asian females. Twice-daily application of 3 percent grape seed extract significantly improved skin elasticity and hydration and reduced the level of melanin. This formulation not only protected against ultraviolet-induced skin damage but also improved overall skin appearance. These investigations clearly demonstrate that grapes have photoprotective effects, which is probably associated with the transcriptional regulation of antiaging genes.

Uses of Grapes and Resveratrol for Skin Depigmentation. Grape polyphenols are considered useful in cosmetics for their skin-rejuvenating benefits. Studies have demonstrated the ability of these compounds to inhibit tyrosinase, the enzyme associated with melanin production and skin pigmentation disorders. When encapsulated in matrices such as hemp protein isolate or soy protein isolate, these polyphenols show multiple skin benefits, including pigmentation modulation, antioxidant activity, and antimicrobial properties. Proanthocyanidin-rich grape seed extract has been shown to cause skin lightening in animal models of ultraviolet-induced skin pigmentation. Similar results have been obtained in short-term human trials. For example, in a 12-week randomized, placebo-controlled study on Japanese women, the effect of red wine on skin color and hydration was observed. The authors used red wine beverages and concentrated these in vacuo to obtain the extract and quantify oligomeric procyanidins using high performance liquid chromatography. The oligomeric procyanidin-containing beverage was administered daily to women, and it was found that the intake of grape oligomeric procyanidins significantly reduced skin pigmentation and melanin index while improving skin moisture content, suggesting that these oligomeric procyanidins may offer benefits in managing sun-induced pigmentation and enhancing skin hydration, making them useful as dietary supplements or functional ingredients in skincare formulations. Additionally, resveratrol has been found to impact the posttranscriptional regulation of melanogenic genes. Resveratrol suppresses melanin formation by downregulating the messenger ribonucleic acid expression of TYR, TYRP1, TYRP2, and MITF in human melanocytes. This effect has been validated in studies, where resveratrol suppressed melanin formation by lowering TYPR2 expression in alpha-M S H-stimulated B16 melanoma cell line and greatly decreased the hyperpigmentation in ultraviolet B-stimulated guinea pig skin in vivo. Additionally, tyrosinase activity can be modulated by resveratrol's chelating capacity via copper ion in the reactive center of the enzyme. Altogether, based on in vitro and in vivo findings, resveratrol and its analogs can function as whitening agents in cosmetics.

Further, a few other components in grapes have been shown to stimulate skin pigmentation. Recently, syringetin, found in red grape extract, has been shown to promote melanogenesis in melanoma cells by increasing melanin production and tyrosinase activity, suggesting that it may have potential for stimulating pigmentation in cosmetic applications for conditions such as vitiligo. However, further investigations are required to validate whether this pigment enhancing effect is only related to syringetin or if there are other compounds in grapes that have similar effects.

Uses of Grape Seed Extracts for Skin Moisturizing and Exfoliation. Grape seed residues that are often discarded as agro-industrial by-products are considered valuable in cosmetic formulations. The extracts from grape residues are used to create scrubs that release antioxidant molecules and provide skin exfoliating effects. By repurposing these residues, cosmetics can not only contribute to zero-waste practices but also enhance the sustainability of the industry by incorporating bioactive compounds that would otherwise go unused. The addition of the grape seed extract as well as its fermented derivatives to cosmetic cream has been shown to improve skin hydration and reduce transepidermal water loss. Grape seed extract promotes collagen synthesis and cell turnover, helps treat acne, and promotes even skin tone. Rich in polyphenols, ascorbic acid, and tocopherols, it increases elasticity, hydration, and smoothness of the skin, keeping it feeling supple and healthy. More investigations into the skin exfoliation capabilities of grape seed-based products have suggested their efficacy in comparison to other common exfoliating agents, including glycolic acid, mandelic acid, and grape juice acid mixtures. Glycolic acid delivers a more aggressive exfoliation, whereas the grape seed-based products provided a safer, more gradual peeling effect, making them suitable for sensitive skin types. This suggests that grape seed extracts and their derivatives could offer milder alternatives for skin exfoliation, providing additional benefits without excessive skin irritation or photosensitivity.

Uses of Grape Extracts and Phytochemicals as Antiaging Agents. The aging process is closely linked to oxidative stress and the breakdown of skin structural proteins, and polyphenolic compounds from fresh grapes, grape marcs, and wine lees, especially resveratrol, exhibit significant antioxidant activity and inhibitory effects on enzymes linked to skin aging. Recent studies investigating the extracts from grape seeds and skins have reported multifaceted antiaging effects, including telomere lengthening, increased telomerase activity, and regulation of the activity of enzymes involved in extracellular matrix remodeling, such as elastase, matrix metalloproteinase-1, and tyrosinase. In one study, researchers studied 59 grape seed flavonoids and found that 14 of them displayed activity in preventing the demethylation of protein phosphatase 2A, an enzyme involved in regulating oxidative stress in skin cells. Quercetagetin, myricetin, and sciadopitysin showed the highest P P 2 A activation activity among all tested flavonoids. By enhancing P P 2 A methylation, grape seed extracts may help combat aging processes and improve skin health. Gallotannin from grapes has also been shown to have antiaging effects mediated via inhibiting the activity of elastolytic enzymes and reducing ultraviolet B-induced damage to human skin cells. In vitro studies have shown that gallotannin can improve collagen synthesis, reduce the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-1, and modulate the E R K and J N K signaling pathways, which are involved in cellular stress and apoptosis.

Recent advancements in nanoparticle technology have enhanced the delivery and stability of grape-derived polyphenols. For example, nanoparticles encapsulating grape seed oil, coenzyme Q10, and retinyl palmitate have shown promising antiaging effects, with significant reductions in the appearance of periorbital wrinkles and improvement in skin hydration. Nanoemulsion formulations of grape pomace extracts and grape seed extracts encapsulated in soy lecithin microdispersions have been found biocompatible with keratinocytes, protecting the cells from oxidative damage and exhibiting excellent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. A novel grape seed oil-loaded dermocosmetic nanoemulgel formulation was tested in a placebo-controlled study to assess its effects on the facial skin of 15 healthy volunteers over a period of 12 weeks. Parameters such as skin melanin, erythema, sebum production, pore size, elasticity, and moisture levels were measured using a variety of instruments. The results demonstrated that the nanoemulgel formulation significantly improved skin moisture and elasticity while reducing melanin, erythema, and pore size compared to the placebo. Sensory scores regarding appearance, odor, consistency, and spreadability of the formulation were also significantly higher for the nanoemulgel, highlighting its potential as an effective skin care agent. Grape seed oil is rich in tocopherols and unsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic, palmitic, stearic, and oleic acids. These substances are categorized as emollients due to their ability to moisturize, soften, and smooth the skin while also providing a protective barrier.

Clinical investigations have also shown the antiaging property of resveratrol. In a 12-week clinical study including 55 women between the ages of 40 and 60, it was found that night cream containing 1 percent resveratrol, 0.5 percent baicalin, and 1 percent vitamin E could improve skin health with significant increase in skin elasticity and firmness while reducing fine wrinkles and skin pigmentation. This was supported by a placebo-controlled, double-blind study in 50 subjects who received a dietary supplement containing resveratrol and procyanidin for 60 days. This treatment improved skin health and reduced roughness and wrinkles. Likewise, topical application of a formulation containing resveratrol, green tea polyphenols, and caffeine led to skin rejuvenation and reduced facial redness in 16 subjects during 8 to 12 weeks of daily application. The beneficial effects of these formulations are due to multiple bioactivities, such as the effect on gene expression of hem oxygenase-1, vascular endothelial growth factor A, and collagen III alpha 1, among other mechanisms. Hemoxygenase-1 protects skin cells against the cytotoxic effects of reactive oxygen species by activating endogenous antioxidant enzymes, whereas V E G F A reduces vascular permeability and inflammation in the skin, thereby decreasing facial redness. Enhanced collagen synthesis further improves skin elasticity and reduces wrinkles.

In summary, grape products have gained recognition in the cosmetic industry due to their potential in combating signs of aging, providing photoprotection, maintaining skin hydration and elasticity, and improving overall skin health.

Conclusions and Prospects. Grapes, Vitis vinifera, are among the world's most widely cultivated fruits. In addition to widespread consumption as a whole food, grapes are used for wine, juice, jam, and raisin production. In recent years there has been growing interest in biologically active phytochemicals found in grapes for their potential health benefits. Grapes are exceptionally rich in bioactive compounds, which are of high interest for pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries. The main groups of bioactive compounds present in grapes are fatty acids, vitamins, and polyphenols, such as flavonoids, stilbenes, phenolic acids, anthocyanins, proanthocyanidins, etc. These compounds have shown great potential in promoting skin health, mitigating photo-damage, and shielding the skin against environmental stressors due to their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-melanogenic, antiproliferative, antimicrobial, and antiaging properties. Grapes and its constituents have also shown effectiveness against skin cancer and inflammatory skin disorders such as atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. Resveratrol, one of the key components of grapes, has demonstrated significant chemopreventive and anticancer properties against melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers. It has diverse mechanisms including scavenging free radicals, preventing lipid peroxidation, inhibiting pro-inflammatory cytokines, and disrupting inflammatory and oxidative stress pathways. Research is underway to enhance the delivery of resveratrol, grape procyanidins, and other grape-derived products through lipid-based nanosystems, such as nanoparticles and organogels, to improve their skin penetration and therapeutic efficacy.

Preclinical studies have suggested that grape polyphenols, especially resveratrol, in combination with standard treatment may be a viable approach for skin cancer management. Furthermore, there is a potential for using grape-derived extracts and compounds in cosmetics. Grape-derived products provide photoprotection, improve skin elasticity and firmness, reduce the appearance of wrinkles and fine lines, alleviate skin redness and inflammation, and have shown potential in reducing hyperpigmentation and improving overall skin health. Other than resveratrol, most of the work is done on grape extracts or oils that contain multiple bioactive components. Further research is needed to explore the specific effects of other individual grape components. Although various preclinical studies have shown the multifaceted mechanisms of various grape-derived phytochemicals in skin diseases and for use in cosmetics, there is still a lack of human clinical trials in this area. Extensive clinical trials are required to establish the efficacy and safety of grape-derived products in the management of skin cancer, atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, and other skin diseases. These studies will help determine optimal doses and treatment durations and further refine the role of grape-derived products in the management of skin diseases.