Overview of Key Grape and Health Research Studies 2000 to 2025. Courtney Romano and John M. Pezzuto.

Abstract. Over the past 25 years, scientific investigations supported by the California Table Grape Commission have led to the publication of over 60 peer-reviewed manuscripts relevant to grapes and health. Further, over 30 clinical investigations have been or are being conducted to explore the potential health benefits of grapes. Here, we provide an overview of the California Table Grape Commission Grapes and Health initiative, as well as synopses of published work. Citations of the literature references are provided, along with summaries in the following areas: antioxidant status, bladder health, breast health, bone and joint health, brain health, eye health, gastrointestinal health, heart health, inflammation, immune health, kidney health, liver health, metabolic health, muscle health, ovarian health, prostate health, and skin health.

Background. In 1997, grapes and grape products such as wine gained the attention of the scientific community and the public as the result of a seminal publication describing the chemopreventive potential of resveratrol. Resveratrol is a phytoalexin found throughout nature, but the most common dietary source is the grape. At the time, the potential health benefits of consuming relatively high quantities of fruits and vegetables were well accepted, for example, five or more servings per day, but frankly, the grape was not as commonly recognized as some other foods, such as carrots and broccoli, in terms of health benefits. At least in part, these factors led the California Table Grape Commission to consider supporting basic and clinical research to explore the potential of grape consumption to impact health.

The California Table Grape Commission represents all table grape growers in the state, which produces 99 percent of the commercially grown table grapes in the USA. It was established by an act of the state legislature in 1967 and approved every five years through grower referenda. The purpose of the commission is to maintain and expand markets for fresh California grapes domestically and worldwide, and in doing so it engages in a variety of activities including research, education, marketing, and community service.

When it became clear that the commission had the will and resources to support grape research, one bedrock specification was established from the outset. This was that the work would be investigator initiated, peer-reviewed, and of the highest scientific caliber. Perhaps most importantly, the commission would follow the science, no matter what the outcome, and maintain a complete firewall in terms of influencing the design of the investigative work or interpreting the results. That early decision has been honored for 25 years.

Thus, the question became how to proceed. Naturally, it was necessary to first assess the state-of-the-art in terms of grape research. For this purpose, it was decided to hold an international symposium. The conference was held April 29 to May 1, 1998, in San Francisco and brought together the small group of scientists worldwide, who had conducted grape-related research to share their findings. The meeting highlighted early work on resveratrol and other grape polyphenols; grapes and heart health; and grapes' potential against several different cancers. The meeting closed with a round-table discussion about future grape research and what directions that could take.

A next important step was to assemble a small group of experts in the field to help flesh out the most effective way to organize the research program and the required administrative structure. The most important outcomes were as follows. First, there would be an open call for applications, worldwide, allowing investigators to propose what they thought would be of greatest interest. Next, since funds were limited, the projects would receive seed grants, with the hope of supporting pilot studies that would generate sufficient data to leverage funding through more well-endowed organizations. Of major importance, it was determined that a standardized product would need to be prepared under the auspices of the commission, and it was required that investigators would perform their work using this product. Quite simply, the availability of this standardized product would ensure the scientific rigor of the work. Others could reproduce the studies, and continuity could be assured year after year. The preparation, characterization, and storage of the product have been described.

The first batch of standardized grape powder was produced in 1999, the first call for applications was released in 2000, the first peer review of the applications was performed in 2000, and the first seven projects were funded that same year. Since that time, there have been 25 calls for applications, with 25 corresponding rounds of peer review, resulting in the funding or support of 95 studies.

The range of health benefits that have resulted and been revealed from these investigator-initiated proposals is truly astounding and beyond what might have been envisioned at the outset of the program. There have been some milestone publications, including a Supplement published in the Journal of Nutrition, two Perspectives published in the Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, the first edition of Grapes and Health, and the current edition of Grapes and Health. These publications highlight many key discoveries, primarily in areas where studies have been performed in greater depth. However, the coverage is not fully comprehensive. In fact, there have been about 62 peer-reviewed publications resulting from work sponsored by the commission. These publications are listed below, with a brief synopsis of key findings.

In sum, over the past 25 years, a great deal of knowledge regarding the health benefits of consuming grapes, in normal amounts between 1.5 and 2.5 cups per day, has been acquired. Key areas with growing evidence include the heart, brain, skin, colon and gastrointestinal tract, and eyes. In the process, grape growers have created an enduring model for industry-sponsored research. Beyond a business perspective, the growing of grapes evokes passion. It has always been obvious that the organoleptic properties of grapes are excellent. The additional element of benefiting human health, to any extent whatsoever, adds to the passion. The novelty of the scientific findings on table grapes generated as a result of the research inspired by this funding mechanism has taught us a great deal about the influence of diet and health, especially in regard to the importance of fruits and vegetables, in which the grape has served as a prototype.

Synopses of Grapes and Health Studies. Given below are brief synopses of studies that have been performed to investigate the potential relationships between grapes and health. In general, but not exclusively, the studies received partial financial support from the California Table Grape Commission. The studies have been grouped into the following categories: antioxidant status, bladder health, breast health, bone and joint health, brain health, eye health, gastrointestinal health, heart health, inflammation, immune health, kidney health, liver health, metabolic health, muscle health, ovarian health, prostate health, and skin health. This listing is arranged alphabetically and is not intended to imply a rank ordering.

Antioxidant Status. Plasma Antioxidant Capacity Changes Following a Meal as a Measure of the Ability of a Food to Alter In Vivo Antioxidant Status. This pilot human study examined whether consuming grapes with a meal could prevent post-prandial oxidative stress, a natural state of oxidative stress in the body that results from eating a meal containing just protein, carbohydrates, and fat, with no antioxidants. The results indicated grape consumption increased blood antioxidant capacity and helped prevent post-meal oxidative stress.

Bladder Health. A Grape-Enriched Diet Helped Protect Bladder Function Against Oxidative Damage Caused by Obstruction to the Bladder. Obstructive bladder dysfunction, such as that observed with prostate enlargement, is linked to oxidative damage of the nerves, synapses, and smooth muscle cells within the bladder wall. A series of animal studies investigated the impact of adding grapes to the diet on bladder function. The studies showed that grapes provided an antioxidant effect that helped to prevent and delay the damaging effects of oxygen deprivation and free radicals to cells that result from a partial obstruction to the bladder. Grapes helped maintain membrane and mitochondrial function in the cells and reduce and reverse bladder damage caused by partial outlet obstruction. The beneficial effects were attributed to the combination of multiple active components in grapes, not just one.

Breast Health. Anticancer Activity of Grape and Grape Skin Extracts Alone and Combined with Green Tea Infusions. The authors focused on inhibition of a growth-related and cancer-specific form of cell surface N A D H oxidase with protein disulfide-thiol interchange activity, discovered by their group and designated t N O X. In an animal study with implanted cells bearing t N O X, the impact of grapes and green tea was tested. The whole grape extract had some effect, but the grape skin extract combined with green tea was more effective. Green tea on its own provided no impact. Additionally, cell studies compared the ability of various grape extracts to inhibit t N O X in human cervical cells and animal mammary cells in culture. Grape and green tea combined were more effective than either alone. Grape skin extracts were more effective than whole grape extract or a grape juice extract. This study also reported that grape flavonoids inhibited t N O X without impacting healthy cells.

Bone and Joint Health. Grape Consumption Improves Joint Mobility and Relieves Pain Associated with Knee Osteoarthritis. A 16-week clinical study investigated the benefits of grape consumption on inflammation and osteoarthritis outcomes. A group of 72 men and women with knee osteoarthritis were assigned to consume either the equivalent of 1.5 cups of grapes or a placebo, each day. Both men and women consuming the grape-enriched diet had a significant decrease in activity-related pain from beginning to end compared to placebo and, by mid-term, an overall decrease in total knee symptoms, with this beneficial effect more pronounced in females. Age-related differences were observed related to activity: grape-consuming subjects under 64 years of age reported a 70 percent increase in very hard activity, while those receiving the placebo reported a significant decrease in very hard activity. Participants over 65 years reported a decline in moderate to hard activities whether consuming grapes or the placebo. No difference in range of motion was observed for either the grape group or the placebo group. A serum marker for inflammation measured was increased in both placebo and grape groups. However, the increase was reduced in the grape group, suggesting some modulatory influence of the grape polyphenols.

Bone Response to Dietary Co-enrichment with Powdered Whole Grape and Probiotics. This study evaluated the effect of adding grapes and probiotics to the diet in a mouse model of age-related osteoporosis. Groups of 10-month-old male mice were fed one of six test diets for six months, with variations in the amount of grape powder and probiotic. No level of grape and probiotic enrichment significantly improved bone health during aging compared to the control diet. The highest-level combination of grape and probiotic appeared have a detrimental effect on bone.

A Grape-Enriched Diet Increased Bone Calcium Retention and Cortical Bone Properties in an Animal Model for Menopause. In this study, laboratory animals consuming a grape-enriched diet had increased bone calcium retention and cortical bone properties, specifically greater thickness and breaking strength relative to those without grapes in their diet.

Brain Health. A Grape-Enriched Diet Protected Against Metabolic Brain Decline in Alzheimer's-Related Areas of the Brain. In a pilot study evaluating people with early memory decline, subjects were either fed whole grape powder equivalent to 2 1/4 cups of grapes per day or a placebo powder. The results showed that consuming grapes preserved healthy metabolic activity in regions of the brain associated with early Alzheimer's disease, where metabolic decline takes hold. Subjects who did not consume grapes exhibited significant metabolic decline in these critical regions. Additionally, those consuming the grape-enriched diet showed beneficial changes in regional brain metabolism that correlated with improvements in attention and working memory.

Effect of Dietary Grapes on Female C57BL6/J Mice Consuming a High-Fat Diet: Behavioral and Genetic Changes. This study investigated the potential for dietary grapes to prevent the cognitive decline that is associated with the chronic consumption of a high-fat diet. With a female mouse model, feeding a standard diet, a high fat diet, and a high-fat diet with 1 percent grapes, the impact of each diet was assessed using behavioral assays for working, intact, and long-term memory, as well as performing genome-wide R N A transcriptome analyses. The results showed that grape consumption beneficially altered gene expression in the brain to counter the negative impact of the high-fat diet. Grape consumption also had positive effects on anxiety-like behavior and cognition that were otherwise impaired by a high-fat diet without grapes. Changes in phenotypic expression in the brain are also reported.

Grape Powder Prevents Cognitive, Behavioral, and Biochemical Impairments in a Rat Model of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. This study investigated the effects of a grape-enriched diet on post-traumatic stress in laboratory animals. Consuming grape powder reversed the behavioral and memory problems that were observed in those animals not receiving a grape-enriched diet. Adding grapes to the diet helped protect against cognitive, behavioral, and biochemical impairments related to traumatic stress. The researchers attributed these benefits to both gene activation and enhanced antioxidant activity resulting from grape intake.

Grape Powder Supplementation Prevents Oxidative Stress-Induced Anxiety-like Behavior, Memory Impairment, and High Blood Pressure in Rats. This study investigated the role of oxidative stress in the combined occurrence of anxiety, cognitive impairment, and hypertension, using a model of oxidative stress. The grape-fed animals exhibited a reduction in anxiety-like behavior and no increase in blood pressure or memory impairment, which the researchers attributed to the antioxidant capacity and activity of the grape polyphenols.

Grape Powder Intake Prevents Ovariectomy-Induced Anxiety-like Behavior, Memory Impairment, and High Blood Pressure in Female Wistar Rats. This study investigated the role of diminished estrogen influence at menopause and its association with oxidative stress and resulting cognitive decline, heightened anxiety, and hypertension. The control animals had increased blood pressure, anxiety-like behavior, and learning memory impairment; the study also exhibited increased oxidative stress in the brain, serum, and urine, and lower amounts of an antioxidant enzyme in the brain. Consumption of the grape-enriched diet reversed these effects.

Dietary Grape Supplement Ameliorates Cerebral Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death in Gerbils. In this study, laboratory animals were fed a control diet or a grape-enriched diet at one of two levels: low and high amounts of grapes. Both grape diets protected against neuronal damage caused by loss of oxygen in the brain, including neuron cell death, D N A damage, and apoptosis. In addition, glial cell activation, which has damaging effects in the brain, was reduced. Animals not receiving a grape-enriched diet exhibited these damaging effects. Researchers credited the antioxidant properties of grape polyphenols with these protective effects.

Eye Health. Impacts of Regular Consumption of Grapes on Macular Pigment Accumulation in Singapore Older Adults: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. In a randomized, controlled human study, 34 human subjects consumed either grapes, equivalent to 1.5 cups of grapes per day, or a placebo for 16 weeks. Those consuming grapes showed a significant increase in Macular Pigment Optical Density, plasma antioxidant capacity, and total phenolic content compared to those on placebo. Those who did not consume grapes experienced a significant increase in harmful ocular advanced glycation end products.

A Grape-Supplemented Diet Prevented Ultraviolet Radiation-Induced Cataract by Regulating Nrf2 and XIAP Pathways. This study examined the impact of grape consumption for 3 months against ultraviolet-induced cataract formation in mice. Animals were fed a diet comprised of 5, 10, or 15 percent grape powder. The results showed that adding grapes to the diet dose-dependently inhibited cataract formation and preserved glutathione pools. The 15 percent grape diet most significantly inhibited the onset and severity of cataracts, resulting in clear lenses. Additionally, ultraviolet-induced Nrf2 activation was abolished in groups on the grape diet, suggesting improved redox homeostasis in the lens.

Protective Effects of a Grape Supplemented Diet in a Mouse Model of Retinal Degeneration. In this study, adding freeze-dried grape powder to the diet preserved retinal structure and function compared to a sugar-matched control. In addition, retinal thickness and photoreceptor numbers were preserved by the grape-supplemented diet compared to controls.

The Sustained Delivery of Resveratrol or a Defined Grape Powder Inhibits New Blood Vessel Formation in a Mouse Model of Choroidal Neovascularization. In a controlled feeding trial with mice, provision of grape powder significantly reduced the formation of harmful blood vessels, choroidal neovascularization, associated with models of the wet form of age-related macular degeneration, a leading cause of blindness in the industrialized world. Researchers found that grape consumption activated the notch signaling pathway to reduce pathological angiogenesis.

Dietary Antioxidants Prevent Age-Related Retinal Pigment Epithelium Damage and Blindness in Mice Lacking the Alpha-v-Beta-5 Integrin. In an animal model of vision loss representative of human macular degeneration, a grape-enriched diet significantly decreased 4-hydroxynonenal-adduct content and lipofuscin granule buildup and prevented age-related cone and rod photoreceptor dysfunction. The grape diet was protective when fed at a younger age, 3 to 6 months or 6 to 9 months, but offered no protection when fed at 9 to 12 months. The grape powder was significantly more protective than lutein.

Gastrointestinal Health. Influence of Grape Consumption on the Human Microbiome. This study analyzed the microbiome composition as well as urinary and plasma metabolites in human subjects that had consumed 2 1/4 cups of grapes per day for two weeks within an eight-week study. Following two weeks of grape consumption, taxonomic abundance was altered with changes observed in the amounts of specific bacteria detected and in enzyme levels and biological pathways. These types of changes were seen again 30 days following the end of grape consumption, some of which returned to baseline levels and others suggesting a prolonged effect of grape consumption. Analysis of a subgroup of subjects showed unique patterns of microbe distribution. While grape consumption did not change the eubiotic state of the microbiome, it does appear to trigger shifts in the intricate interactive networks that may have physiological influence.

Effect of Standardized Grape Powder Consumption on the Gut Microbiome of Healthy Subjects: A Pilot Study. Human subjects consuming the equivalent of 1.5 cups of grapes per day for four weeks showed increased microbial diversity as measured by the Shannon Index. Among the beneficial bacteria that increased was Akkermansia, which has been linked to beneficial effects on glucose and lipid metabolism and on the integrity of the intestinal lining. Grape consumption significantly modified cholesterol and bile metabolism as well, decreasing total cholesterol by 6.1 percent and H D L cholesterol by 7.6 percent, with a trend of decreasing L D L cholesterol by 5.9 percent. Bile acids were significantly reduced by 40.9 percent.

Results of a Phase One Clinical Trial Examining the Effect of Plant-Derived Resveratrol and Grape Powder on Wnt Pathway Target Gene Expression in Colonic Mucosa and Colon Cancer. In this study, normal colonic mucosa and colon cancer tissue were examined pre- and post-exposure to grape powder by oral consumption. The subjects consumed whole grape powder every day for two weeks; samples of healthy and cancerous colon tissues were taken before and after consuming the grape diet. The results showed that subjects consuming the equivalent of 2 1/2 cups of grapes for two weeks showed a 47 percent reduction in the expression of certain target genes involved in the W N T-signaling pathway that are responsible for promoting tumor growth in the colon. This beneficial effect was seen in the subjects' healthy colon tissue, but not the cancerous, suggesting that regular consumption of grapes may help to maintain a healthy colon.

Effect of a Grape-Supplemented Diet on Proliferation and Wnt Signaling in the Colonic Mucosa Are Greatest for Those Over Age 50 and with High Arginine Consumption. In this study, 30 healthy subjects were randomly assigned to one of three diets: consuming either one-third, two-thirds, or one pound of grapes each day for two weeks. Samples of colon tissue were taken before and after consuming the grape diets. The results showed that grape consumption at all three levels inhibited the expression of Wnt pathway target genes and markers of mucosal proliferation involved in cancer promotion. The researchers noted that the potential benefits of grape intake are most significant for high-risk older individuals and individuals whose diet is high in arginine intake; both of these groups have an increased incidence of colon cancer. This study reinforces previous findings that suggest a potential protective role for grapes against colon cancer.

Multi-organ Nutrigenomic Effects of Dietary Grapes in a Mouse Model. In a year-long study where mice consumed a grape-enriched diet equivalent to the human consumption of 2.5 servings of grapes per day, study findings showed the ability of grapes to modulate gene expression in the colon. By enriching and up-regulating beneficial pathways while down-regulating harmful pathways, researchers suggested that the grape diet promoted anti-inflammatory activity, suppressed mitochondrial dysfunction, maintained cell balance, homeostasis, and inhibited cancer-promoting pathways.

Grape Consumption Reduces Adiposity and Markers of Hepatic Lipogenesis and Alters Gut Microbiota in Butter Fat-Fed Mice. In this study, consuming either 3 or 5 percent grapes in addition to a high-fat diet for 11 weeks reduced the percentage of body fat, including subcutaneous and visceral fat deposits, reduced markers of inflammation, and improved glucose tolerance and intestinal barrier function. Those consuming 3 percent grapes exhibited an increase in some beneficial gut bacteria, Akkermansia muciniphila, and a decrease in detrimental bacteria. Further, the grape-enriched diet mitigated high-fat-induced impairment to the intestine, commonly known as leaky gut. Grape-fed mice at either the 3 or 5 percent diet showed reduced total body and inguinal fat and displayed lower liver weights and triglyceride levels. The grape diet had a minor effect on markers of inflammation or lipogenesis in adipose tissue or intestine.

Heart Health. Grape Polyphenols Reduce Blood Pressure and Increase Flow-Mediated Vasodilation in Men with Metabolic Syndrome. In this study, men with metabolic syndrome consumed either grape powder or a placebo for 30 days then switched to the alternate diet for 30 days following a 3-week washout period. Adding grapes to the diet improved vascular function by promoting relaxation of the arteries, reducing blood pressure, and reducing certain inflammatory molecules.

Vasoprotective Endothelial Effects of a Standardized Grape Product in Humans. In this human study, consuming grape powder in an amount equivalent to 1 1/4 cups of fresh grapes per day helped improve blood vessel function in five healthy adult male subjects. Consuming the same amount of grape powder, but twice a day for 21 days, caused even greater improvements in blood vessel function and antioxidant capacity. This study also demonstrated that consuming grapes with a high fat meal helped prevent the damaging impact, reduced blood flow, that was observed with a high fat meal consumed without grapes.

Grape Polyphenols Exert a Cardioprotective Effect in Pre- and Post-menopausal Women by Lowering Plasma Lipids and Reducing Oxidative Stress. Key risk factors for coronary heart disease were reduced in pre- and post-menopausal women consuming the equivalent of 1 1/4 cups of grapes per day. These included a reduction in blood triglyceride levels, L D L cholesterol levels, and key markers for inflammation in the body. Additionally, the researchers observed a significant reduction in whole body oxidative stress.

Vascular and Cardiac Effects of Grape Powder in the Spontaneously Hypertensive Rat. This study investigated the effects of grape consumption in spontaneously hypertensive rats. No changes to the physiology of the heart were observed. However, grape consumption elicited a significant reduction in blood pressure, improved arterial relaxation, increased vascular compliance, and attenuated cardiac hypertrophy.

Grapes Added to the Diet Helped Lower Blood Pressure, Improve Heart Function, Reduce Inflammation, and Reduce Heart Muscle Damage Associated with a High-Salt Diet. In a series of laboratory animal studies, a grape-enriched diet helped protect against high blood pressure and the development of heart failure commonly associated with a high-salt diet. One study examined the impact of adding grapes to the diet of animals consuming either a high- or low-salt diet and also those receiving a mild dose of a common blood pressure drug, hydrazine. Those consuming a grape-enriched diet had lower blood pressure, better heart function, reduced inflammation throughout their bodies, and fewer signs of heart muscle damage than those consuming the same diet but without grapes. The group receiving the blood pressure medicine, but no grapes, demonstrated a reduction in blood pressure, but their hearts were not protected from damage as was the case in the grape-fed group. Two additional studies, using a similar study model and feeding a grape-enriched diet, also demonstrated these types of protective effects.

Grape Powder Polyphenols Attenuate Atherosclerosis Development in Apolipoprotein E-Deficient Mice and Reduce Macrophage Atherogenicity. This study found that a grape-enriched diet helped prevent the accumulation of harmful oxidized cholesterol and reduced the development of atherosclerotic lesions by 41 percent. The animals consuming the grape-enriched diet also exhibited reduced oxidative stress, increased serum antioxidant capacity, reduced cell uptake of oxidized cholesterol, and decreased oxidation of L D L cholesterol.

Grape Polyphenols Decrease Plasma Triglycerides and Cholesterol Accumulation in the Aorta of Ovariectomized Guinea Pigs. In an animal model for menopausal women, female ovariectomized guinea pigs were fed either a control diet or a grape-enriched diet for 12 weeks. Dietary cholesterol was added to both diets to raise plasma cholesterol levels and promote the development of atherosclerosis. Study findings showed that while plasma L D L concentrations did not differ between the groups, those consuming the grape-enriched diet had 39 percent lower plasma triglycerides, 50 percent lower V L D L cholesterol, and 33 percent lower concentrations of cholesterol in the aorta, compared with animals on the control diet.

Inflammation. Effects of Grape Consumption on Biomarkers of Inflammation, Endothelial Function, and Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell Gene Expression in Obese Subjects. This study investigated the effects of grape consumption on biomarkers of cardiovascular health in obese participants in both postprandial and chronic settings. Twenty obese adults consumed 60 grams whole grape powder or placebo followed by high fat high carbohydrate meal challenge. Following acute challenge, participants consumed their respective treatment regimen daily for 4 weeks to determine effects of chronic consumption. Acute grape consumption resulted in decreased vasoconstrictor E T-1 concentration and increased gene expression related to oxidative stress defense following a high-fat meal. Four weeks of daily grape consumption had little effect on cardiovascular biomarkers or gene expression measured in this study, although some increase in s V C A M-1 concentration was observed.

Dietary Grape Powder Increases Interleukin-1 Beta and Interleukin-6 Production by Lipopolysaccharide-Activated Monocytes and Reduces Plasma Concentrations of Large L D L and Large L D L-Cholesterol Particles in Obese Humans. This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study with freeze-dried grape powder in obese men and women found that those consuming grape powder had increased production of I L-1 beta and I L-6 supernatants from lipopolysaccharide-activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells compared with the placebo powder group. These results suggest an increase in the sensitivity of monocytes in a population at greater risk of developing infections. No difference in production of T-cell cytokines was observed. Additionally, consuming grapes reduced the plasma concentrations of atherogenic lipid fractions, large L D L-cholesterol and large L D L particles, compared with the placebo group.

Grape Consumption's Effects on Fitness, Muscle Injury, Mood, and Perceived Health. In this study, 40 recreationally active young adults consumed either a grape or placebo drink for 45 consecutive days. Before and after measures of treadmill-running V O 2 max, mood, and perceived health status were made. High intensity eccentric actions of nondominant elbow flexors were also performed, and arm muscle inflammation, pain, and function were measured before and two days after the elbow exercises were done. No significant effect of grape consumption was found on any of the outcomes with this group of volunteers.

Effects of Consumption of Whole Grape Powder on Basal N F-Kappa B Signaling and Inflammatory Cytokine Secretion in a Mouse Model of Inflammation. In this study of inflammation in an animal model, consuming a 4 percent grape-enriched diet significantly reduced baseline levels of inflammatory signaling, N F-kappa B activity. Although no significant benefit was seen against externally induced sources of inflammation in both acute and repeated exposures, the baseline levels of inflammatory cytokines, I L-6 and T N F-alpha, in the animals within the acute challenge group were lower in the grape-fed group versus the control group. The investigators note that persistent low-grade inflammation is a hallmark of many chronic diseases and that a grape-enriched diet may help suppress this harmful effect.

Grape Powder Extract Attenuates Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha-Mediated Inflammation and Insulin Resistance in Primary Cultures of Human Adipocytes. This study examined the effects of grapes on markers of inflammation and insulin resistance in primary cultures of newly differentiated human adipocytes treated with T N F-alpha. Results showed that grape extract reduced the expression of a number of inflammatory genes, including I L-6, I L-1 beta, C O X-2, and M C P-1, and prevented or reduced the expression of negative regulators of insulin sensitivity and suppressors of insulin-stimulated glucose uptake.

Potential Mechanisms by Which Polyphenol-Rich Grapes Prevent Obesity-Mediated Inflammation and Metabolic Diseases. This review article highlights the ways in which grapes and grape polyphenols have been reported to reduce inflammation, thus exhibiting potential to prevent metabolic diseases. Five key mechanisms were emphasized: acting as an antioxidant or promoting antioxidant activity; attenuating endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling; blocking proinflammatory proteins and transcription factors involved in metabolic disease; suppressing inflammatory gene expression; or activating transcription factors that may reduce obesity-mediated chronic inflammation.

Polyphenol-Rich Grape Powder Extract Attenuates Inflammation in Human Macrophages and in Human Adipocytes Exposed to Macrophage-Conditioned Media. In a cell study of immune and fat cells, grapes were shown to reduce inflammation and insulin resistance, thus improving glucose uptake by fat cells and helping to protect important cell functions. Obesity and type 2 diabetes are both linked to chronic inflammation in fat tissue.

Immune Health. Circadian Modulation of the Antioxidant Effect of Grape Consumption: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. This study investigated the impact of timing of grape intake on the magnitude of its antioxidant effect. In the randomized, controlled study, 32 healthy men and women consumed either a grape drink, equivalent to 1.5 servings per day, or placebo drink with a high fat meal in the morning or evening. The study results support a protective effect of grape consumption against morning sensitivity to oxidative stress. Total F2 isoprostane excretion was highest in the a.m. versus p.m. and highest with the placebo group versus the other groups.

Kidney Health. Long-Term Dietary Consumption of Grapes Affects Kidney Health in C57BL/6 J Mice. In mice consuming a grape-enriched diet for one year, beneficial impacts on kidney health were observed, compared to those on the standard diet. Those consuming the grape-enriched diet exhibited decreased body to kidney weight ratio; significantly reduced blood urea nitrogen which was associated with enhanced perfusion in the kidney that may have contributed to that protective effect; and beneficial up- and down-regulation of specific genes related to kidney health, immune health, and others, including improved mitochondrial function.

Multi-Organ Nutrigenomic Effects of Dietary Grapes in a Mouse Model. In a year-long study where mice consumed a grape-enriched diet, eating the equivalent of 2.5 servings of grapes per day, study findings showed the ability of grapes to modulate gene expression in the kidney. Consuming grapes enriched an array of beneficial pathways and down-regulated harmful pathways, resulting in enhanced immune regulators, repair potential of the kidneys, ability to fight infections, and suppressed genes related to carcinogenesis.

Daily Intake of Grape Powder Prevents the Progression of Kidney Disease in Obese Type 2 Diabetic ZSF1 Rats. In a study using an animal model for metabolic syndrome-associated chronic kidney disease, consuming a 5 percent grape powder diet for 6 months protected renal function in obese, diabetic animals, preventing the progression of kidney disease. The grape-enriched diet prevented kidney tissue damage by increasing antioxidant defense in the kidneys, upregulating antioxidant promoting genes and downregulating genes linked to oxidative stress. Consumption of the grape diet also lowered serum glucose and improved serum protein status.

Liver Health. Multi-organ Nutrigenomic Effects of Dietary Grapes in a Mouse Model. In a year-long study where mice consumed a grape-enriched diet, eating the equivalent of 2.5 servings of grapes per day, study findings showed the ability of grapes to modulate gene expression in the liver, suggesting enhanced capability of the liver to combat foreign bacteria and viruses. By enriching beneficial pathways and down-regulating harmful pathways, grapes also bolstered metabolic detoxification activity, promotion of a tumor suppressor gene, and mitochondrial response to liver injury.

Consumption of Grapes Modulates Gene Expression, Reduces Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease, and Extends Longevity in Female C57BL/6 J Mice Provided with a High-Fat Western-Pattern Diet. This study explored the potential of grape consumption to modulate adverse effects caused by a high-fat Western-pattern diet. Female mice either consumed a standard diet, a grape-enriched diet at 5 percent, a high-fat diet, or a high-fat diet supplemented with 5 percent grape powder. In the standard group consuming grapes, researchers observed beneficial effects including enriched R N A mitochondria and improved metabolic pathways. In the high-fat diet plus grapes group, grapes also had a beneficial impact, modulating liver gene expression, preventing oxidative damage, inducing fatty acid metabolism, defending against non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and increasing longevity.

Addition of Grapes to Both a Standard and a High-Fat Western Pattern Diet Modifies Hepatic and Urinary Metabolite Profiles in the Mouse. Grape powder, human equivalent of 2 servings per day, was added to both a standard and a high-fat Western pattern diet given to 10-week-old female C57BL/6 J mice for a period of 91 days. Alterations in hepatic and urinary metabolite patterns were determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. Urinary excretion of various gut microbiota metabolites was altered when grapes were added to the standard diet. Increased hepatic ascorbic acid and 5-oxoproline levels indicated the antioxidant effect of grape powder on the liver. The authors conclude that a grape diet reprograms the gut microbiota metabolism, attenuates the hepatic oxidative stress of a high-fat diet, and increases the efficiency of glucose utilization by the liver for energy production.

Freeze-Dried Grape Powder Attenuates Mitochondria- and Oxidative Stress-Mediated Apoptosis in Liver Cells. In this cell study, grape extract helped promote the healthy functioning of liver cells and protected liver cells from oxidative stress and cell death. Researchers found that grape extract helped promote liver cell viability, growth, and metabolic activity. Specifically, grapes positively influenced a critical cell communication pathway that regulates liver cell health. Additionally, grapes helped protect the cells against oxidative stress and mitochondrial injury.

Metabolic Health. Effects of Freeze-Dried Grape Powder on High-Density Lipoprotein Function in Adults with Metabolic Syndrome. This study evaluated the effects of grape consumption on measures of high-density lipoprotein function in adults with metabolic syndrome. Twenty overweight adults consumed grape powder or placebo for 4 weeks each. Although grape consumption did not affect H D L function in this study, grapes did improve fasting triglycerides, a risk factor for cardiovascular disease.

Grape Powder Attenuates the Negative Effects of G L P-1 Receptor Antagonism by Exendin-3 in a Normoglycemic Mouse Model. This study explored the effects of grape powder consumption on metrics of glycemic health in normoglycemic and prediabetic mice. Consuming grape powder significantly reduced blood glucose levels following oral glucose intake after G L P-1 receptor antagonism by exendin-3 compared to a sugar match control, indicating that it was able to attenuate the hyperglycemic effects of G L P-1 receptor antagonism. Grapes incorporated into acute and long-term high fat treatment diets did not improve glycemic control versus a placebo, suggesting that more study is warranted.

Differential Effects of Grape Powder and Its Extract on Glucose Tolerance and Chronic Inflammation in High-Fat-Fed Obese Mice. This study examined the anti-inflammatory properties of grape powder and grape powder extract as well as their impact on glucose tolerance in high-fat fed obese animals. The grape powder diet improved glucose tolerance at five weeks but not beyond and decreased markers of inflammation in both serum and adipose tissue at 18 weeks. Quercetin showed anti-inflammatory effects on human fat cells. The grape extract had no impact on glucose tolerance at any time point.

Diets Rich in Polyphenols and Vitamin A Inhibit the Development of Type 1 Autoimmune Diabetes in Nonobese Diabetic Mice. In this study, a grape-enriched diet protected against the destruction of insulin-producing cells in the pancreas, reduced levels of inflammation in the spleen, and increased antioxidant capacity in non-obese, diabetic animals.

Muscle Health. Long-Term Dietary Consumption of Grapes Alters Phenotypic Expression in Skeletal Muscle of Aged Male and Female Mice. This study assessed gene expression in the skeletal muscles of male and female mice fed a grape-enriched diet, human equivalent of 2 servings per day, versus a control diet over 2.5 years. Daily consumption of grapes significantly altered muscle gene expression, including up- and down-regulation of gene expression with improved muscle function. Additionally, gene expression pattern analytics showed a more pronounced effect in females, suggesting male and female muscle convergence, with greater enhancement of female muscle traits toward a male-like phenotype. The results are suggestive of broad health benefits.

Ovarian Health. Multi-organ Nutrigenomic Effects of Dietary Grapes in a Mouse Model. In a year-long study where mice consumed a grape-enriched diet, eating the equivalent of 2.5 servings of grapes per day, study findings showed the ability of grapes to modulate gene expression in the ovaries. Consuming grapes enriched an array of beneficial pathways and down-regulated harmful pathways, including the up-regulation of genes related to the process of ovulation and down-regulation of genes involved in ovarian cancer.

Prostate Health. A Grape-Enriched Diet Attenuated Obesity-Related Inflammation and Prostate Cancer Progression. The chemopreventive potential of grape-supplemented diets was evaluated in genetically predisposed and obesity-provoked prostate cancer, using prostate-specific Pten heterozygous transgenic mice. The animals were fed a low- and high-fat diet, supplemented with 10 percent grape powder for 33 weeks. Consuming grapes had a beneficial impact: researchers observed a reduction in proliferation of prostate epithelial cells, rescue of P T E N expression, a protective effect against high-fat diet induced inflammation, activation of cell survival pathways and angiogenesis, as well as reduced circulating levels of cancer-promoting micro R N As.

Skin Health. Short-Term Grape Consumption Diminishes UV-Induced Skin Erythema. In this study, 29 human volunteers consumed whole grape powder, equivalent to 2.25 cups of grapes per day, for 14 days. Measurement of Minimal Erythema Dose plus metabolomic analysis of the gut microbiome, blood, and urinary samples was undertaken. One-third of the subjects showed increased ultraviolet resistance following grape consumption, and these same subjects displayed unique and significant differences in the microbiome and metabolome, compared to non-responders, suggesting a correlation between the gut and skin. Natural components known as polyphenols found in grapes are thought to be responsible for these beneficial effects.

Dietary Table Grape Protects Against UV Photodamage in Humans. In a human pilot study, subjects consuming grapes, equivalent to 2.25 cups per day, showed increased resistance to sunburn and a reduction in markers of ultraviolet damage at the cellular level. The skin response of subjects to ultraviolet light was measured before and after consuming grapes by determining the Minimal Erythema Dose. Grape consumption was protective; more ultraviolet exposure was required to cause sunburn following grape consumption, with Minimal Erythema Dose increasing on average by 74.8 percent. Analysis of skin biopsies showed that the grape diet was associated with decreased D N A damage, reduced loss of skin cells, and a reduction in inflammatory markers.

Protective Effects of Dietary Grape on UVB-Mediated Cutaneous Damages and Skin Tumorigenesis in SKH-1 Mice. In a study that utilized both a short-term model of ultraviolet B-mediated skin damage and long-term model of skin carcinogenesis, researchers observed that with a grape-enriched diet, there was a reduction in tumor growth and malignant conversion of cells, where cells in normal tissue or benign tumors become cancerous. These benefits are attributed to the antioxidant properties of grapes, which likely inhibit early oxidative injury, leading to downstream anti-inflammatory effects and changes in other pathways.

Chemoprotective Effects of Dietary Grape Powder on UVB Radiation-Mediated Skin Carcinogenesis in SKH-1 Hairless Mice. In a study using an animal model of ultraviolet B-induced skin cancer, consuming either a 3 percent or 5 percent grape powder diet for 28 weeks significantly inhibited tumor incidence and delayed the onset of tumor growth. The grape-mediated protective response was accompanied by enhanced D N A damage repair, reduced proliferation, increased cancer cell death, and beneficial changes in several markers of oxidative stress.

Identification of Molecular Targets of Dietary Grape-Mediated Chemoprevention of Ultraviolet B Skin Carcinogenesis: A Comparative Quantitative Proteomics Analysis. This follow-up study evaluated the potential mechanisms for the beneficial effects observed in earlier studies. The approach of tandem mass tag quantitative global proteomics on skin tumors from mice exposed to ultraviolet B and fed control or grape diet was applied. It is reported that grapes act as an anti-inflammatory agent and enhance the activity of a protein complex, the 20S proteasome, that plays a role in cell cycle regulation including disposal of damaged proteins that contribute to the progression of cancer.